We refer to a way of life in an integrated domain where hunches, cut-and-try, intangibles, and the human "feel for a situation" usefully co-exist with powerful concepts, streamlined terminology and notation, sophisticated methods, and high-powered electronic aids.
Augmenting man's intellect, in the sense defined above, would warrant full pursuit by an enlightened society if there could be shown a reasonable approach and some plausible benefits.
This report covers the first phase of a program aimed at developing means to augment the human intellect.
This kind of system approach to human intellectual effectiveness does not find a ready-made conceptual framework such as exists for established disciplines.
Before a research program can be designed to pursue such an approach intelligently, so that practical benefits might be derived within a reasonable time while also producing results of longrange significance, a conceptual framework must be searched out--a framework that provides orientation as to the important factors of the system, the relationships among these factors, the types of change among the system factors that offer likely improvements in performance, and the sort of research goals and methodology that seem promising.
Section II contains the essence of this framework as derived from several different ways of looking at the system made up of a human and his intellect-augmentation means.
The process of developing this conceptual framework brought out a number of significant realizations: that the intellectual effectiveness exercised today by a given human has little likelihood of being intelligence limited--that there are dozens of disciplines in engineering, mathematics, and the social, life, and physical sciences that can contribute improvements to the system of intellect-augmentation means; that any one such improvement can be expected to trigger a chain of coordinatingimprovements; that until every one of these disciplines comes to a standstill and we have exhausted all the improvement possibilities we could glean from it, we can expect to continue to develop improvements in this human-intellect system; that there is no particular reason not to expect gains in personal intellectual effectiveness from a concerted systemoriented approach that compare to those made in personal geographic mobility since horseback and sailboat days.
By this same strategy, we recommend that an initial research effort develop a prototype system of this sort aimed at increasing human effectiveness in the task of computer programming.
The surveying data for the layout he is working on now have already been entered, and he has just coaxed the clerk to show him a perspective view of the steep hillside building site with the roadway above, symbolic representations of the various trees that are to remain on the lot, and the service tie points for the different utilities.
After a moment, the architect changes the scene on the screen to an overhead plan view of the site, still showing the excavation.
Ignoring the representation on the display, the architect next begins to enter a series of specifications and data--a six-inch slab floor, twelve-inch concrete walls eight feet high within the excavation, and so on.
He examines it, adjusts it, pauses long enough to ask for handbook or catalog information from the clerk at various points, and reacijusts accordingly.
Prescribing different planes here and there, curved surfaces occasionally, and moving the whole structure about five feet, he finally has the rough external form of the building balanced nicely with the setting and he is assured that this form is basically compatible with the materials to be used as well as with the function of the building.
Here the capability of the clerk to show him any view he wants to examine (a slice of the interior, or how the structure would look from the roadway above) is important.
The "clerk" allows him to follow each in turn, examining how doors swing, where special lighting might be needed.
Finally he has the "clerk" combine all of these sequences of activity to indicate spots where traffic is heavy in the building, or where congestion might occur, and to determine what the severest drain on the utilities is likely to be.
However, the computer has many other capabilities for manipulating and displaying information that can be of significant benefit to the human in nonmathematical processes of planning, organizing, studying, etc.
Every person who does his thinking with symbolized concepts (whether in the form of the English language, pictographs, formal logic, or mathematics) should be able to benefit significantly.
Second, even if our conceptual framework did provide an accurate and complete basic analysis of the system from which stems a human's intellectual effectiveness, the explicit nature of future improved systems would be highly affected by (expected) changes in our technology or in our understanding of the human being.
His processing is of two kinds: that which he is generally conscious of (recognizing patterns, remembering, visualizing, abstracting, deducing, inducing, etc.
The individual does not use this information and this processing to grapple directly with the sort of complex situation in which we seek to give him help.
He uses his innate capabilities in a rather more indirect fashion, since the situation is generally too complex to yield directly to his motor actions, and always too complex to yield comprehensions and solutions from direct sensory inspection and use of basic cognitive capabilities.
For instance, an aborigine who possesses all of our basic sensory-mental-motor capabilities, but does not possess our background of indirect knowledge and procedure, cannot organize the proper direct actions necessary to drive a car through traffic, request a book from the library, call a committee meeting to discuss a tentative plan, call someone on the telephone, or compose a letter on the typewriter.
Training --the conditioning needed by the human being to bring his skills in using Means 1, 2, and 3 to the point where they are operationally effective.
The aspects of the conceptual framework that are discussed here are primarily those relating to the human being's ability to make significant use of such equipment in an integrated system.
While an untrained aborigine cannot drive a car through traffic, because he cannot leap the gap between his cultural background and the kind of world that contains cars and traffic, it is possible to move step by step through an organized training program that will enable him to drive effectively and safely.
Consider the process of writing an important memo.There is a particular concept associated with this process -- that of putting information into a formal package and distributing it to a set of people for a certain kind of consideration -- and the type of information package associated with this concept has been given the special name of memorandum .
If it is a complex memo, involving a good deal of careful planning and development, then all of the sub-processes might well be of the composite type (e.g., at least including the use of pencil and paper artifacts)' and there might be many different applications of some of the process capabilities within the total process (i.e., successive drafts, revised plans).
The set of sub-process capabilities discussed so far, if called upon in proper occasion and sequence, would indeed enable the execution of the memo-writing process.
An information-storage mechanism in the writing machine permits you to sweep the reading stylus over the characters much faster than the writer can type; the writer will catch up with you when you stop to think about what word or string of words should be duplicated next, or while you reposition the straightedge guide along which you run the stylus.
It would be practical for you to accommodate more complexity in the trails of thought you might build in search of the path that suits your needs.
You can integrate your new ideas more easily, and thus harness your creativity more continuously, if you can quickly and flexibly change your working record.
This will probably allow you to accommodate the extra burden associated with, for instance, keeping and using special files whose contents are both contributed to and utilized by any current work in a flexible manner--which in turn enables you to devise and use even-more complex procedures to better harness your talents in your particular working situation.
This one innovation could trigger a rather extensive redesign of this hierarchy; your way of accomplishing many of your tasks would change considerably.
The realization that any potential change in language, artifact, or methodology has importance only relative to its use within a process' and that a new process capability appearing anywhere within that hierarchy can make practical a new consideration of latent change possibilities in many other parts of the hierarchy--possibilities in either language, artifacts, or methodology--brings out the strong interrelationship of these three augmentation means.
Increasing the effectiveness of the individual's use of his basic capabilities is a problem in redesigning the changeable parts of a system.
Existing, or near-future, technology could certainly provide our professional problem-solvers with the artifacts they need to have for duplicating and rearranging text before their eyes, quickly and with a minimum of human effort.
Even ao apparently minor an advance could yield total changes in an individual's repertoire hierarchy that would represent a great increase in over-all effectivenesa.
But an active research effort, aimed at exploring and evaluating poasible integrated changes throughout the repertoire hierarchy, could greatly accelerate this evolutionary process.
The reaearch effort could guide the product development of new artifacts toward taking long-range meaningful steps; simultaneously competitively minded individuals who would respond to demonstrated methods for achieving greater personal effectiveness would create a market for the more radical equipment innovations.
When one looks at a computer system that is doing a very complex job, he sees on the surface a machine that can execute some extremely sophisticated processes.
If he is a layman, his concept of what provides this sophisticated capability may endow the machine with a mysterious power to sweep information through perceptive and intelligent synthetic thinking devices.
Actually, this sophisticated capability results from a very clever organizational hierarchy so that pursuit of the source of intelligence within this system would take one down through layers of functional and physical organization that become successively more primitive.
The first level down would organize functions corresponding to statements in a problem-oriented language (e.g., ALGOL or COBOL), to achieve the desired over-all process.
Then a machine designer could take over, and with a block diagram of the computer's organization he could show us (Level 4) how the different hardware units (e.g., random-access storage, arithmetic registers, adder, arithmetic control) are organized to provide the capability of executing sequences of the commands used in Level 3.
But rather soon we have crossed the boundary between what is man-organized and what is nature-organized, and are ultimately discussing the way in which a given physical phenomenon is derived from the intrinsic organization of sub-atomic particles, with our ability to explain succeeding layers blocked by the exhaustion of our present human comprehension.
The biologists and physiologists use a term "synergism" to designate (from Webster's Unabridged Dictionary , Second Edition) the "...cooperative action of discrete agencies such that the total effect is greater than the sum of the two effects taken independently..." This term seems directly applicable here, where we could say that synergism is our most likely candidate for representing the actual source of intelligence 2c1e
In particular, the intelligence of a human being, derived ultimately from the characteristics of individual nerve cells, undoubtedly results from synergism.
But deriving the concepts brought out in the preceding section has shown us that indeed this term does seem applicable to our objective.
In amplifying our intelligence, we are applying the principle of synergistic structuring that was followed by natural evolution in developing the basic human capabilities.
What we have done in the development of our augmentation means is to construct a superstructure that is a synthetic extension of the natural structure upon which it is built.
In a very real sense, as represented by the steady evolution of our augmentation means, the development of "artificial intelligence" has been going on for centuries.
In any composite process, there is cooperative interaction between the two domains, requiring interchange of energy (much of it for information exchange purposes only).
However, the "man-artifact interface" has existed for centuries, ever since humans began using artifacts and executing composite processes.
Of all the aspects of the pending event, the spilling of the coffee and the squashing of the pastry somehow are abstracted immediately, and associated with a concept of personal responsibility and a dislike for these consequences.
With only non-symbolic concept manipulation, we could probably build primitive shelter, evolve strategies of war and hunt, play games, and make practical jokes.
Here we temporarily disregard communicative speech and writing, and consider only the direct value to the individual of being able to do his heavy thinking by mentally manipulating symbols instead of the more unwieldly concepts which they represent.
(We are not concerned here with the value derived from human cooperation made possible by speech and writing, both forms of external symbol manipulation.
We speak of the manual means of making graphical representations of symbols--a stick and sand, pencil and paper and eraser, straight edge or compass, and so on.)
Apparently there are counter-arguments to this; e.g., if a concept needs to be used often but its expression is difficult, then the language will evolve to ease the situation.
For our conceptual framework, we tend to favor the view that a language does exert a force in its own evolution.
Under such evolutionary conditions, it would seem unlikely that the language we now use provides the best possible service to our minds in pursuing comprehension and solving problems.
If the Neo-Whorfian hypothesis could be proved readily, and if we could see how our means of externally manipulating symbols influence both our language and our way of thinking, then we would have a valuable instrument for studying human-augmentation possibilities.
If the means evolved for an individual's external manipulation of his thinking-aid symbols indeed directly affect the way in which he thinks, then the original Whorfian hypothesis would offer an added effect.
One way of viewing the H-LAM/T system changes that we contemplate--specifically, integrating the capabilities of a digital computer into the intellectual activity of individual humans--is that we are introducing new and extremely advanced means for externally manipulating symbols.
(4) Automated external symbol manipulation --In this stage, symbols with which the human represents the concepts he is manipulating can be arranged before his eyes, moved, stored, recalled, operated upon according to extremely complex rules--all in very rapid response to a minimum amount of information supplied by the human, by means of special cooperative technological devices.
In the limit of what we might now imagine, this could be a computer, with which we could communicate rapidly and easily, coupled to a three-dimensional color display within which it could construct extremely sophisticated images--with the computer being able to execute a wide variety of processes upon parts or all of these images in automatic response to human direction.
The displays and processes could provide helpful services--we could imagine both simple and exotic varieties--and could involve concepts that we have never yet imagined (as the pregraphic thinker of Stage 2 would be unable to predict the bar graph, the process of long division, or a card file system).
In search of some simple ways to determine what the Neo-Whorfian hypothesis might imply, we could imagine some relatively straightforward means of increasing our external symbol-manipulation capability and try to picture the consequent changes that could evolve in our language and methods of thinking.
Actually, it turned out to be simpler to invert the problem and consider a change that would reduce our capability for external symbol manipulation.
Brains of power equal to ours could have evolved in an environment where the combination of artifact materials and muscle strengths were so scaled that the neatest scribing tool (equivalent to a pencil, possible had a shape and mass as manageable as a brick would be to us-assuming that our muscles were not specially conditioned to deal with it.
2c4n1 To reflect further upon the implications of this hypothesis, the following hypothetical artifact development can be considered, representing a diiferent type of external symbol manipulation that could have had considerable effect.
Suppose that our young technology of a few generations ago had developed an artifact that was essentially a high speed, semi-automatic table-lookup device--cheap enough for almost everyone to afford and small and light enough to be carried on the person.
If it were so very easy to look things up, how would our vocabulary develop, how would our habits of exploring the intellectual domains of others shift, how might the sophistication of practical organization mature (if each person can so quickly and easily look up applicable rules), how would our education system change to take advantage of this new external symbol-manipulation capability of students and teachers (and administrators)?
The significance to our study of the discussion in this section lies in the perspective it gives to the ways in which human intellectual effectiveness can be affected by the particular means used by individuals for their external symbol manipulation.
It seems reasonable to consider the development of automated external symbol manipulation means as a next stage in the evolution of our intellectual power.
The concept of our H-LAM/T system possessing a repertoire of capabilities that is structured in the form of a hierarchy is most useful in our study.
Determining the class of basic capabilities not already utilized within existing augmentation systems requires a different exploration method.
We are developing a growing awareness of the significant and pervasive nature of such structure within every physical and conceptual thing we inspect, where the hierarchical form seems almost universally present as stemming from successive levels of such organization.
Tentatively we have isolated five such types--although we are not sure how many we shall ultimately want to use in considering the problem of augmenting the human intellect, nor how we might divide and subdivide these different manifestations of physical-process structuring.
And further, our assumption is that when the human in our H/LAM system makes the key decision or action that leads to the solution of a complex problem, it will stem from the state of his mental structure at that time.
It would be to ignore the emphases of our own conceptual framework not to make fullest use of any theory that provided a working explanation for a group of empirical data.
What's more, our entire conceptual framework represents the first pass at a "theoretical model with which to organize our thinking and action."
For present purposes, we can view a concept structure as something which we might try to develop on paper for ourselves or work with by conscious thought processes, or as something which we try to communicate to one another in serious discussion.
Words structured into phrases, sentences, paragraphs, monographs--charts, lists, diagrams, tables, etc.
A problem solver is involved in a stream of conceptual activity whose course serves his mental needs of the moment.
But another kind of view might be obtained by extracting and ordering all statements in the local text that bear upon consideration A of the argument--or by replacing all occurrences of specified esoteric words by one's own definitions.
This sort of "view generation" becomes quite feasible with a computer-controlled display system, and represents a very significant capability to build upon.
But let the human specify to the instrument his particular conceptual need of the moment, relative to this internal image.
With the set of standard translation rules appropriate to the situation, it portrays to the human via its display a symbol structure designed for his quick and accurate perception and comprehension of the conceptual matter pertinent to this internally composed substructure.
No longer does the human work on stiff and limited symbol structures, where much of the conceptual content can only be implicitly designated in an indirect and distributed fashion.
The individual processes (or actions) of my hands and fingers have to be cooperatively organized if the typewriter is to do my bidding.
It pretty well represents the artifact component of our augmentation means, insofar as their actual physical construction is concerned.
We can confidently expect the development of much more powerful concepts pertaining to the manner in which symbol structures can be manipulated and portrayed, and correspondingly more complex manipulation processes that in the first pass would have been beyond the human's power to organize and execute without the better symbol, concept, and mental structuring which his augmented system provided him.
At one time or another he will be the policy maker, the goal setter, the performance supervisor, the work scheduler, the professional specialist, the clerk, the janitor, the entrepreneur, and the proprietor (or at least a major stockholder) of the system.
This situation is typical for any of us engaged in reasonably demanding types of professional pursuits, and yet we have never received explicit training in optimum ways of carrying out any but a very few of the roles at a very few of the levels.
A well-designed H-LAM/T system would provide explicit and effective concepts, terms, equipment, and methods for all these roles, and for their dynamic coordination.
We can readily recognize that there are many ways to organize and manage such a superstructure, resulting in vastly different degrees of efficiency in the application of the workers' talents.
In the situation where talent is limited, we find a close parallel to our H-LAM/T system in its pursuit of comprehension and problem solutions.
We obtain an even closer parallel if we say that the thinking, planning, supervising, record keeping, etc., for each contractor is actually done by a single individual for the whole superstructure, time- sharing his attention and talents over these many tasks.
Today this individual cannot be depended upon to have any special training for many of these roles; he is likely to have learned them by cut and try and by indirect imitation.
This is a terrific additional burden, but it allows a freedom of action that has tremendous importance to the effectiveness the system exhibits to the outside world.
We could expect significant gains from automating the H- LAM/T system if a computer could do nothing more than increase the effectiveness of the executive processes.
But executive roles in a complex problem situation also require conceptual activity--e.g., comprehension, selection, supervision--that can benefit from well-designed symbol structures and fast, flexible means for manipulating and displaying them.
The means available to humans today for developing and manipulating these symbol structures are both laborious and inflexible.
It is hard enough to develop an initial structure of diagrams and text, but the amount of effort required to make changes is often prohibitively great; one settles for inflexibility.
Also, the kind of generous flexibility that would be truly helpful calls for added symbol structuring just to keep track of the trials, branches, and reasoning thereto that are involved in the development of the subject structure; our present symbol-manipulation means would very soon bog down completely among the complexities that are involved in being more than just a little bit flexible.
This view increases our respect for the essential importance of the basic capability of composing and modifying efficient symbol structures.
In other words, this capability depends heavily upon proper language, artifacts, and methodology, our basic augmentation means.
When the course of action must respond to new comprehension, new insights and new intuitive flashes of possible explanations or solutions, it will not be an orderly process.
Basic human cognitive powers, such as memory intelligence, or pattern perception can have such a compounded effect.
The augmentation means employed today have generally evolved among large statistical populations, and no attempt has been made to fit them to individual needs and abilities.
A good, automated H-LAM/T system should provide the opportunity for a significant adaptation of the augmentation means to individual characteristics.
A great deal of richness in the future possibilities for automated H-LAM/T systems is implied here--considerably more than many people realize who would picture the computer as just helping them do the things they do now.
Another factor can exert this type of compound effect upon over-all system performance: the human's unconscious processes.
Clinical psychology seems to provide clear evidence that a large proportion of a human's everyday activity is significantly mediated or basically prompted by unconscious mental processes that, although "natura" in a functional sense, are not rational.
The conceptual structure which we have evolved to orient and guide the pursuit of increasing man's intellectual effectiveness has been des cribed in the foregoing sections in a rather general and abstract fashion.
It must be borne in mind that a great deal of study and invention is yet to be done in developing the improved augmentation means that are bound to come, and that the examples which we present in this report are intended only to show what is meant by the generalizations which we use, and to provide a feeling on the part of the reader for the richness and power of the improvements we can likely develop in our augmentation means.
Each of the examples will show a facet of how the little steps that the human can take with his sensory-mental-motor apparatus can be organized cooperatively with the capabilities of artifacts to accomplish significant things in the way of achieving comprehension and solving problems.
An early paper, offering suggestions toward augmenting the human intellect, that fits well and significantly within the framework which we have developed was written by Vannevar Bush 6 in 1945.
Indeed, it fits so well, and states its points so nicely, thst it was deemed appropriate to our purpose here to summarize it in detail and to quote from it at considerable length.
He summarized the situation: "...There is a growing mountain of research...The investigator is staggered by the findings and conclusions of thousands of other workers.
Professionally our methods of transmitting and reviewing the results of research are generations old...truly significant attainments become lost in the mass of the inconsequential...The summation of human experience is being expanded at a prodigious rate, and the means we use for threading through the consequent maze to the momentarily important item is the same as was used in the days of square-rigged ships."
And he points out that devices which we commonly use today--e.g., a calculating machine or an automobile--would have been impossibly expensive to produce in earlier eras of our technological development.
"...The world has arrived at an age of cheap complex devices of great reliability and something is bound to come of it."
In six and a half pages crammed full of well-based speculations, Bush proceeds to outline enough plausible artifact and methodology developments to make a very convincing case for the augmentation of the individual intellectual worker.
Extension of existing photographic techniques to give each individual a continuously available miniature camera for recording anything in view and of interest, and to realize a high-quality 100:1 linear reduction ratio for micro-record files for these photographs and published material; voice-recognition equipment (perhaps requiring a special language) to ease the process of entering new self-generated material into the written record--these are to provide the individual with information-generating aid.
For the detailed manipulation of mathematical and logical expressions, Bush projects computing aids (which have been surpassed by subsequent development) that allow the individual to exercise a greater proportion of his time and talents in the tasks of selecting data and the appropriate transformations and processes which are to be executed, leaving to the machinery the subsequent execution.
They employ a symbolism which grew like Topsy and has little consistency; a strange fact in that most logical field.")
stands in the way of full realization of machine help for the manipulations associated with the human's real time process of mathematical work.
This is a much larger matter than merely the extraction of data for the purposes of scientific research; it involves the entire process by which man profits by his inheritance of acquired knowledge The prime action of use is selection, and here we are halting indeed.
There may be millions of fine thoughts, and the account of the experience on which they are based, all encased within stone walls of acceptable architectural form; but if the scholar can get at only one a week by diligent search, his syntheses are not likely to keep up with the current scene."
Bush goes on to say, "The real heart of the matter of selection, however, goes deeper than a lag in the adoption of mechanisms...Our ineptitude in getting at the record is largely caused by the artificiality of systems of indexing."
He spends the last two pages (a quarter of his article) describing a device embodying this capability, and points out some features of its use and of its likely effect.
"Consider a future device for individual use, which is a sort of mechanized private file and library.
A memex is a device in which an individual stores all his books, records, and communications, and which is mechanized so that it may be consulted with exceeding speed and flexibility.
"It consists of a desk, and while it can presumably be operated from a distance, it is primarily the piece of furniture at which he works.
On deflecting one of these levers to the right he runs through the book before him, each page in turn being projected at a speed which just allows a recognizing glance at each.
He can add marginal notes and comments, taking advantage of one possible type of dry photography, and it could even be arranged so that he can do this by a stylus scheme, such as is now employed in the telautograph seen in railroad waiting rooms, just as though he had the physical page before him.
"Thereafter, at any time, when one of these items is in view, the other can be instantly recalled merely by tapping a button below the corresponding code space.
Several years later, his talk with a friend turns to the queer ways in which a people resist innovations, even of vital interest.
"Wholly new forms of encyclopedias will appear, ready-made with a mesh of associative trails running through them, ready to be dropped into the memex and there amplified.
It might be striking to outline the instrumentalities of the future more spectacularly, rather than to stick closely to the methods and elements now known and undergoing rapid development, as has been done here.
"All our steps in creating or absorbing material of the record proceed through one of the senses - the tactile when we touch keys, the oral when we speak or listen, the visual when we read.
"We know that when the eye sees, all the consequent information is transmitted to the brain by means of electrical vibrations in the channel of the optic nerve.
This is an exact analogy with the electrical vibrations which occur in the cable of a television set: they convey the picture from the photocells which see it to the radio transmitter from which it is broadcast.
With a couple of electrodes on the skull the encephalograph now produces pen-and-ink traces which bear some relation to the electrical phenomena going on in the brain itself.
True, the record is unintelligible, except as it points out certain gross misfunctioning of the cerebral mechanism; but who would now place bounds on where such a thing may lead?
"Presumably man's spirit should be elevated if he can better review his shady past and analyze more completely and objectively his present problems.
He has built a civilization so complex that he needs to mechanize his record more fully if he is to push his experiment to its logical conclusion and not merely become bogged down part way there by overtaxing his limited memory.
His excursion may be more enjoyable if he can reacquire the privilege of forgetting the manifold things he does not need to have immediately at hand, with some assurance that he can find them again if they prove important.
Yet, in the application of science to the needs and desires of man, it would seem to be a singularly unfortunate stage at which to terminate the process, or to lose hope as to the outcome.
Any file is a symbol structure whose purpose is to represent a variety of concepts and concept structures in a way that makes them maximally available and useful to the needs of the human's mental-structure development -- within the limits imposed by the capability of the artifacts and human for jointly executing processes of symbol-structure manipulation.
The Memex allows a human user to do more conveniently (less energy, more quickly) what he could have done with relatively ordinary photographic equipment and filing systems, but he would have had to spend so much time in the lower-level processes of manipulation that his mental time constants of memory and patience would have rendered the system unusable in the detailed and intimate sense which Bush illustrates.
Also note the "wholly new forms of encyclopedia", the profession of "trail blazers," and the inheritance from a master including "the entire scaffolding" by which such additions to the world's record were erected.
These illustrate the types of changes in the ways in which people can cooperate intellectually that can emerge from the augmentation of the individuals.
This type of change represents a very significant part of the potential value in pursuing research directly on the means for making individuals intellectually more effective.
An Existing Note and File System 3a7b The "unit records" here, unlike those in the Memex example, are generally scraps of typed or handwritten text on IBM-card sized edge-notchable cards.
These represent little "kernels" of data, thought, fact, considerationJ concepts, ideas, worries, etc., that are relevant to a given problem area in my professional life.
None of the principles of indexing or sorting used here is new: coordinate-indexing descriptors with direct coding on edge notched cards, with needle-sort retrieval.
Extracting such items or kernels and putting each on its own notecard helps this process considerably--the role or position of each such item in the growth of the note structure is independent, and yet if desired all can quickly be isolated and extracted by simple needle sorting on the reference-number notching field.
They provide a workspace for me, in which I can browse, make additions or corrections, or build new sets of thought kernels with a good deal of freedom.
When I am in the process of developing an integrated writeup covering some or all of the notedeck'g material, I can quickly needle out a set of cards relevant to the topic under consideration at the moment--with all other cards in one pile to the side--and I need do a very minimum of hand searching or stacking in special little category piles.
Comments on the System 3a7c First, let me relate what has been described to the special terms brought out in previous sections.
One aspect of the structure is the physical grouping of the cards at a given time-- which happens to be the only aspect of the over-all structuring that my human capabilities can make direct use of--and in this respect I can execute processes which produce restructuring (that is, physical re grouping) that helps me considerably to perceive and assimilate the concepts of worth to me.
This restructuring is effected by composite processes involving me, a master code card, a sorting needle, and a work surface.
If my mental processes were more powerful, I could dispense with the cards, and hold all of the card-sized concept structures in my memory, where also would be held the categorization linkages that evolved as I worked (with my feet up on the artifacts and my eyes closed).
As it is, and as it probably always will be no matter how we develop or train our mental capabilities, I want to work in problem areas where the number and interrelationship complexity of the individual factors involved are too much for me to hold and manipulate within my mind.
One need arose quite commonly as trains of thought would develop on a growing series of note cards.
There was no convenient way to link these cards together so that the train of thought could later be recalled by extracting the ordered series of notecards.
An associative-trail scheme similar to that out lined by Bush for his Memex could conceivably be implemented with these cards to meet this need and add a valuable new symbol-structuring process to the system.
d. An Experiment Illustrating Usage and Further System Possibilities 3a7e I once tried to use my cards, with their separate little "concept packets," in the process of developing a file memo outlining the status and plans of a research project.
I realized that I was being rather philosophi cally introspective with all of this analysis, but I was curious as to the potential value of future augmentation means in allowing me to deal explicitly with these types of structuring.
This brought me to appreciate the value of some sort of copying device with which I could transfer specified strings of words from one card to another, thus composing new statements from fragments of existing ones.
This type of device should not be too hard to develop and produce for a price that a professional man could justify paying, and it would certainly facilitate some valuable symbol-structuring pro 3a7e4
In trying to do flexible structuring and restructuring within my experiment, I found that I just didn't have the means to keep track of all of the kernel statements (cards) and the various relation ships between them that were important--at least by means that were easy enough to leave time and thought capacity enough for me to keep in mind the essential nature of the memo-writing process.
But it was a very provocative experience, considering the possibilities that I sensed for the flexible and powerful ways in which I could apply myself to so universal a design task if I but had the necessary means with which to manipulate symbol structures.
It would actually seem quite feasible to develop a unit record system around cards and mechanical sorting, with automatic trail establishment and trail-following facility, and with associated means for selective copying or data transfer, that would enable development of some very powerful methodology for everyday intellectual work.
Very likely, by the time good augmentation systems could be developed, and the first groups of users began to prove them out so that they could gain more widespread acceptance, electronic data processing equipment would have evolved much further and become much more prevalent throughout the critical-problem domains of our society where such ideas would first be adopted.
The next set of descriptive examples will involve the use of electronic computers, and their greatly increased flexibility and processing potential will be evident.
In particular, the electronic-based experimental program could simulate the types of processes available from electromechanical artifacts, if it seemed possible (from the vantage of experience with the wide range of augmentation processes) that relatively powerful augmentation systems could be based upon their capabilities--but the relative payoffs for providing even-more-sophisticated artifact capabilities could be assessed too so that considerations of how much to invest in capital equipment versus how much increase in human effectiveness to expect could be based upon some experimental data.
A little familiarity with computer technology, enough to help considerably in understanding the augmentation possibilities discussed in thls report, can be gained by the uninitiated.
For those already familiar with the technology, the following discussion can perhaps help them gain more understanding of our concepts of process and symbol structuring.
The ability to have the computer modify its own process structure (program) hss been a very im portant factor in the development of its power.
Other languages and techniques for the manipulation of list structures have been described by McCarthy,( 8 ) by Gelernter, Hansen, and Gerberich, ( 9 ) by Yngve, ( 10 , 11 ) by Perlis and Thornton, ( 12 ) by Carr, ( 13 ) and by Weizenbaum.
The languages and techniques used in both types of application promise to be of considerable value to the development of radical new augmentation systems for human problem solvers, and we shall deal later with them in more detail.
Cheaper, larger-capacity backup storage is usually provided by devices to which access takes considerably longer (in the computer's time reference).
Such block-transfer is accomplished by a relatively small structure of primitive computer processes that cyclically executes the transfer of one word at a time until the designated block has been trans ferred.
Another type of backup storage uses a number of large, thin discs (about three feet in diameter), with magnetic coating on the sur faces.
A commercially available disc storage system could hold over a hundred million of the human's basic symbols, to which random access would average about a tenth of a second, and where the cost per symbol-space would be about one seventh of a cent.
A transport unit, connected to the computer, might cost $30,000, with tape reels at $50 each holding about five million of the human's basic symbols.
Under computer control an arbitrary collection of symbols may be arranged on the screen, with considerable freedom as to relative location, size, and brightness.
The amount of usable information on such a screen, in the form of letters, numbers, and diagrams, would be limited to about what a normal human eye could make out at the normal reading distance of fourteen inches on a surface 3-1/2 inches square, or to what one could discern on an ordinary 8-1/2-by-11-inch sheet of paper at about three feet.
This means that one couldnot have a single-tube display giving him an 8-1/2-by-11-inch frame to view that would have as much on it as he might be used to seeing, say on the page of a journal article.
One sbould expect these prices to be lowered quite drastically as our technology improves and the market for these displays increases.
For communicating to the computer, considerable freedom exists in arranging pushbuttons, switches, and keysets for use by the human.
The "interpretation" or response to be made by the computer to the actuation of any button, switch, or key (or to any combination thereof) can be established in any manner that is describable as a structure of primitive computer processes--which means essentially any manner that is explicitly describable.
There are also computer-input devices that can sense enough data from handwriting to allow a computer to recognize a limited number of handwritten symbols--both as they are being written and afterwards.
Means for recognizing typescript are rather well developed and are already being designed into some large documentation and language translation systems.
There is considerable economic pressure toward developing useful and cheap devices of this type, and we can expect relatively sophisticated capabilities to become available within the next ten years.
An important type of development for our consideration of providing individual humans with close-coupled computer services is what is known as time sharing.
Such a fast and agile helper as a computer can run around between a number of masters and seldom keep any of them waiting (at least, not long enough that they would notice it or be inconvenienced appreciably).
When we began our search, we found a great deal of literature which put forth thought and work of general significance to our objective-- frankly, too much.
Without having a conceptual framework, we could not efficiently filter out the significant kernels of fact and concept from the huge mass which we initially collected as a "natural first step" in our search.
We feel rather unscholarly not to buttress our conceptual framework with plentiful reference to supporting work, but in truth it was too difficult to do.
Developing the conceptual structure represented a sweeping synthesis job full of personal constructs from smatterings picked up in many places.
Under these conditions, giving reference to a backup source would usually entail qualifying footnotes reflecting an unusual interpretation or exonerating the other author from the implications we derived from his work.
Ulam ( 16 ) has specifically recommended close man-computer interaction in a chapter entitled, "synergesis," where he points out in considerable detail the types of mathematical work which could be aided.
Good ( 17 ) includes some conjecture about possibilities of intellectual aid to the human by close cooperation with a computer in a rather general way, and also presents a few interesting thoughts about a network model for structuring the conceptual kernels of information to facilitate a sort of self-organizing retrieval system.
Ramo has given a number of talks dealing with the future possibilities of computers for "extending man's intellect," and wrote several articles ( 18 , 19 ) His projections seem slanted more toward larger bodies of humans interacting with computers, in less of an intimate personal sense than the above papers or than our initial goal.
Fein ( 20 ) in making a comprehensive projection of the growth and dynamic inter-relatedness of "computer-related sciences," includes specific mention of the enhancement of human intellect by cooperative activity of men, mechanisms, and automata.
He coined the term "synnoetics" as applicable generally to the cooperative interaction of people, mechanisms, plant or animal organisms, and automata into a system whose mental power is greater than that of its components, and presented a good picture of the integrated way in which many currently separate disciplines should be developed and taught in the future to do justice to their mutual roles in the important metadiscipline defined as "synnoetics."
In the second category, there have been a few papers published recently describing actual work that bears directly upon our topic.
Mr. Douglas Ross, of the Electronic Systems Laboratory at MIT has, we learned by direct conversation, been thinking and working on real-time man-machine interaction problems for some years.
We understand that another graduate student there, Ivan Sutherland, is currently using the display-computer facility on the TX-2 computer at Lincoln Lab to develop cooperative techniques for engineering-design problems.
And at RAND, we have learned by personal discussion that Cliff Shaw, Tom Ellis, and Keith Uncapher have been involved in implementing a multi-station time-sharing system built around their JOHNNIAC computer.
Termed the JOHNNIAC Open-Shop System (JOSS for short), it apparently is near completion, and will use remote type writer stations.
The picture of the possibilities to pursue will change and grow rapidly as research gets under way, but we need to provide what pictures we can--to give substance to the generalities developed in Section II , to try to impart our feeling of rich promise, and to introduce a possible research program ( Section IV ).
In fact, even if we in some way could know now what would emerge after say, ten years of research, it is likely that any but a general description would be difficult to express in today's terminology.
To try to give you (the reader) a specific sort of feel for our thesis in spite of this situation, we shall present the following picture of computer-based augmentation possibilities by describing what might happen if you were being given a personal discussion-demonstration by a friendly fellow (named Joe) who is a trained and experienced user of such an augmentation system within an experimental research program which is several years beyond our present stage.
We assume that you approach this demonstration-interview with a background similar to what the previous portion of this report provides--that is, you will have heard or read a set of generalizations and a few rather primitive examples, but you will not yet have been given much of a feel for how a computer-based augmentation system can really help a person.
Some of the time Joe is using both hands on the keys, obviously feeding information into the computer at a great rate.
A good deal of Joe's time, though, seems to be spent with one hand on a keyset and the other using a light pen on the display surface.
You ask yourself why you weren't prepared for this, and you are forced to admit that the generalizations you had heard hadn't really sunk in--"new methods for manipulating symbols" had been an oft-repeated term, but it just hadn't included for you the images of the free and rapid way in which Joe could make changes in the display, and of meaningful and flexible "shaping" of ideas and work status which could take place so rapidly.
But Joe suddenly cleared the displays and turned to you with a grin that signalled the end of the passive observation period, and also that somehow told you that he knew very well that you now knew that you had needed such a period to shake out some of your limited images and to really realize that a "capability hierarchy" was a rich and vital thing.
"For explanation purposes here, let's say that the lowest level at which the computer system comes into direct play in my capability hierarchy is in the task of what I'll call 'single-frame composition.'
This low-level composition task is just what you normally do with a pen or pencil or typewriter on a piece of paper-- that is, assemble a bunch of symbols before your eyes in order to portray something which you have in mind."
You listened and watched as Joe showed you some of the different ways in which the composition of straightforward text was made easier for him in this system.
"It turns out that this simple capability makes it feasible to do some pretty rough tasks in the upper levels of the capability hierarchy--where precise use of special terms really pays off, where the human just couldn't be that precise by depending upon his unaided memory for definitions and 'standards,' and where using dictionary and reference-book lookup in the normal fashion would be so distracting and time-consuming that the task execution would break down.
You could get some dim feeling for what he meant, having watched him working for a while, but you were nevertheless much relieved to find the next thing he showed you to be more directly impressive.
At a subsequent reading, if he had for gotten what the abbreviation stood for, he could call for substitution of the full object string to refresh his memory.
You believed him after he transcribed your talking for a minute or so, and it gave you an eerie feeling to see the near instantaneous appearance of your words and sentences in neat printed form.
The word disappeared from the frame, and the rest of the text simultaneously readjusted to present the neat, no-gap, full-line appearance it had had.
Leaving his light pen pointed at the space where a deleted symbol string used to be, Joe could reinstate it instantaneously with one stroke of his left hand.
Again it would disappear instantaneously from where it had been, but now the modified display would show the old text to have been spread apart just enough at the indicated point to hold this string.
With similar types of keyset and light-pen operations, Joe could change paragraph break points, transpose two arbitrary symbol strings (words, sentences, paragraphs, etc., or fragments thereof), readjust margins of arbitrary sections of text--essentially being able to affect immediately any of the changes that a proofreader might want to designate with his special marks, only here the proofreader is always looking at clean text as if it had been instantaneously retyped after each designation had been made.
One of the sections of text was about a third longer than the other--but two quick strokes with Joe's left hand caused the computer to adjust the display automatically.
Yes, you were beginning to get a feel for what the expression "flexible new methods for manipulating symbol structures" might really imply, at least on this basic-capability level.
"You usually think of an argument as a serial sequence of steps of reason, beginning with known facts, assumptions, etc., and progressing toward a conclusion.
Joe tells you that you are to develop an argument leading to statements summarizing the augmentation means so far revealed to you for doing the kind of straight-text work usually done with a pencil and eraser on a single sheet of paper.
You unconsciously look for a scratch pad before you realize that he is telling you that you are going to do this the "augmented way" by using him and his system--with artful coaching from him.
"Very natural development, just the way we humans always seem to start out on a task for which we aren't all primed with knowledge, method, experience, and confidence--which is to include essentially every problem of any consequence to us.
So let's see how we can accommodate the human's way of developing his comprehension and his final problem solution.
You didn't need the hint, but thanks anyway, and let's start rearranging and cleaning up the work space instead of just dumping more raw material on it.
With closer coaching now from Joe, you start through the list of statements you've made and begin to edit, re-word, compile, and delete.
Your ideas begin to take shape, and you can continually re-work the existing set of statements to keep representing the state of your "concept structure."
Let's take these questions one at a time and see how some changes in structuring might help a per son answer them better.
"Here is one standard portrayal, for which I have established a computer process to do the structuring automatically on the basis of the interword links."
A few strokes on the keyset and suddenly the sentence fell to pieces--different parts of it being positioned here and there, with some lines connecting them.
Some good methods, plus a bit of practice, and you'd be surprised how much a diagrammatic breakdown can help you to scan a complex statement and untangle it quickly.
These secondary substructures wouldn't appear when you normally viewed the statement, but could be brought in by simple request if you wanted closer study.
Let us use what we call 'antecedent links' to point to these, and I'll give you a basic idea of how we structure an argument so that we can quickly track down the essential basis upon which a given statement rests."
(This choosing was remarkably helped by having only the remainder statements to study for each new choice--another little contribution to effectiveness, you thought.)
So, Joe spent a few minutes (with your help) establishing a reasonable set of links among the statements you had originally listed.
Then another keyed-in request to the computer, and almost instantaneously there appeared a network of lines and dots that looked something like a tree--except that sometimes branches would fuse together.
"Also, we can display extra fine-structure and labelling detail within the network in the specific local area we happen to be concentrating upon.
You and I have been worxing with some of the lower-ordered substructures--the individual statements and the multistatement argu ments--and have skimmed through some of the ways to build and manipulate them.
But at any such level, the manner in which the interrelationship between the kernels of argument can be tagged, portrayed, studied and manipulated is much the same as those which we have just been through.
Substructures that represent graphs, curves, engineering drawings, and other graphical forms can likewise be integrated.
These different appended substructures can remain invisible to the worker until such time as he wants to flush them into view.
"You should also realize that a substructure doesn't have to be a hunk of data sitting neatly distinct within the normal form of the larger structure.
A good deal of this type of activity is involved during the early, shifting development of some phase of work, as you saw when you were collecting tentative argument chains.
But we have learned quite a few simple tricks for leaving appended road signs, supplementary information, questions, and auxiliary links on our working structures--in such a manner that they never get in our way as we work--so that the visitor to our structure can gain his comprehension and isolate what he wants in marvelously short order.
"What we found ourselves doing, when having to do any extensive digesting of journal articles, was to type large batches of the text verbatim into computer store.
It is so nice to be able to tear it apart, establish our own definitions and substitute, restructure, append notes, and so forth, in pursuit of comprehension, that it was generally well worth the trouble.
The references are available for study in original serial form on our screens, but any structuring and tagging done by a previous reader, or ourselves, can also be utilized.
"A number of us here are using the augmented systems for our project research, and we find that after a few passes through a reference, we very rarely go back to it in its original form.
The contributions from these references form sturdy members of our structure, and are duly tagged as to source so that acknowledgment is always implicitly noted.
It is rather amazing how much superfluous verbiage is contained in those papers merely to try to make up for the pitifully sparse possibilities available for symbol structuring in printed text."
I've developed a sequence for presenting the different basic features of our augmentation system that seems to work pretty well, and I just wanted to be sure I was still following it reasonably closely."
"It's time to shift the topic a bit, and some of the things on the screen that are probably puzzling you can make a starting point for a new discussion phase.
See, when I outlined a delivery for giving a feel for these techniques to the uninitiated, I could have sketched out the subject matter in a skeletal argument structure.
It is a rather trivial exercise of the techniques we have for developing and manipulating processes, but anyway that's the form I chose for making the notes.
For one thing, the laying out of objectives and a method of approach for a problem represent a form of process design and building, to our way of looking at it.
Well, we can't analyze the old ways of doing things very accurately to check his estimated figures, but we certainly have come to be in general sympathy with his stand.
"There are, of course, the explicit computer processes which we use, and which our philosophy requires the augmented man to be able to design and build for himself.
"It won't take too much time to give you a feel for the helpful methods we have for working on computer-process structures -- or programs -- because there is quite a bit of similarity in concept to what you have seen in the symbol-structuring techniques.
Well, you have already seen how you can get help in developing precise and powerful statements, or in gaining quick comprehension of state ments, by charting or diagramming them and using special links between the different parts.
In several brief, successive frame displays, before he got to the one he wanted, you got glimpses of network schematics that reminded you of those used in symbol structuring.
But this portrayal doesn't stem from special appended information, it can be laid out like this automatically by the computer, just from the cues it gets from the necessary symbol components of the statement.
Then I can use the keyset to ask for the preceding statement, if I'm a little puzzled about the detailed manipulation--or, I can request a specific higher-level view of the process structure by light-pen selection on one of these remaining symbols here.
"Most of this portrayal technique actually represents special structuring of what we previously defined in a loose way as arguments.
We have developed a number of special symbol-structuring techniques that allow us to match especially well to the concepts involved in designing processes.
"In our studying and designing process structures, we have found many ways to capitalize upon this more sophisticated question-answering capability now possessed by the computer.
For instance, planning a research project, or a day's work, are examples of structuring composite processes.
In fact, we are even learning how the computer can be made to watch for some kinds of plan-change possibilities, and to point them out to the human when they arise.
Last winter, we designed a computer process that can automatically monitor the occurrence of specified types of computer usage over a specified period of time, and which, from the resulting data, can deduce a surprising amount of information regarding how the human made use of that time.
Then we added more features to the program, in which the computer occasionally interrupts the human's activity and displays some questions to be answered.
We found special types of tags and descriptive codes which we could append to these respective planning structures as we developed them which later facilitated our man-computer cooperative review of them.
But we have taken to linking special tagging codes into these argument structures involving our planning, to identify for the computer some of the different types of dependency relationships in the antecedent linkages.
There is a plan I am currently using for the way I go about entering miscellaneous scraps of infcrmation lnto my total symbol structure.
Recently, I got an idea as to how I might add a little feature to that process that specially suited my particular way of wanting to deal with miscellaneous thoughts that I get.
By various means, I very quickly learned that this would be easy to do if I could but reverse the order ln whlch I execute the sub-process Steps A and B, when I enter a piece of lnformation.
"This I could do relatively rapidly, by your standards, by snooping down the antecedent trails, looking for statements relevant to this timing question.
The computer keeps track of where I have looked, where I've marked things as yes, or no, or possible, and does the bookkeeping and calculating necessary to guide me through an optimum search strategy.
"So I phrased a question which essentially asked for considerations relevant to the order in which these two steps were executed, and turned the computer loose.
"Suppose you were told that you could subscribe to a community- owned installation of special equipment--containing all sorts of wonderful instruments tools and machines for measuring and processing with such as chemical, optical, mechanical, electronic, pneumatic, vacuum, metallurgy, and human factors.
"A lot of questions you might ask he couldn't answer directly, but in such a case he could often lead you quickly to some relevant pages in his books.
The set of routine processes which he could manage all alone still provided you with a great deal of help--in fact, you got to developing ways to build things so as to capitalize upon his efficiency at these tasks.
"As an inventor and builder of devices that solve needs, you could become a great deal more versatile and productive, applying your imagination, intuition, judgment, and intelligence very effectively over a much wider range of possibilities.
You could tackle much more complex and sophisticated projects, you could come up with very much better results--neater, cheaper, more reliable, more versatile, higher-quality performance--and you could work faster.
But between these two types of working domains we nonetheless find closely analogous conditions relative to the variety and sophistication of the processes and techniques applicable to what nonroutine workers do.
Consider the intellectual domain of a creative problem solver, and listen to me rattle off the names of some specialized disciplines that come to mind.
Realize that there is also a correspondingly large list of specialized materials potentially usable in the fabrications of the intellectual worker.
The things that I have been de monstrating to you this afternoon were designed to increase significantlY the range of both processes and materials over which a human can practically operate within this intellectual domain.
Not only that, but to provide an accurate analogy, we have to give him a computer to help him organize and monitor his activity and assess his results.
This actually makes it practical to use many specialized processes and techniques from very esoteric fields--to assess their applicability and limitations quickly, to incorporate them intelligently into the design and analysis of possible courses of action, and to execute them efficiently.
If I give up, I leave a structure which is very well organized to accommodate a subsequent revisit with new data, possibilities, assumptions, objectives, or tools.
Also, I set up a sentinel process that will operate in the future to help alert me to concepts which may clear the block.
"This feature, of always having satisfying actions to perform, and having a good feeling that they are what I should be doing at that time, gives a surprisingly contented, eager, and absorbing flavor to my work.
I guess it's an adult instance of the sort of change observed in students when they were given teaching machines that provided continuous participation and reinforcement.
If any two want to work simultaneously on the same material, they simply duplicate and each starts reshaping his version--and later it is easy to merge their contributions.
The whole team can join forces at a moment's notice to 'pull together' on some stubborn little problem, or to make a group decision.
Most points of contention are resolved quite naturally, over a period of time, as the developing structure of argument bears out one, or the other, or neither stand.
One can either take immediate personal issue with another about some feature, anywhere in the structure where he might find something done by the other to which he wants to take issue, or he can append his objection and the associated argument there where the disagreement lies, and tag this with a special cue that signals a point of contention that must ultimately be resolved.
Reduce this language barrier, and provide the feature of their being able to work in parallel independence on the joint structure, and what seems to result is amplification of their different capabilities.
But I have selected the sample features to present to you with an eye toward giving you a maximum chance to identify these as being something significant to your own type of work.
"What I hoped to avoid by presenting the system in this way, was losing your identification with these possibilities by letting you get the mistaken impression that an individual couldn't harness these techniques usefully unless he first learned a lot of very sophisticated new language, logic and math.
These were all relatively high-level people, and they were completely and unreservedly unanimous in their faith that their increased capability would easily justify the capital and operating outlay that we predicted for work stations of this sort in five years, if the computer industry really were to take this type of potential market seriously.
"For instance, we initially felt that defining categories and relationships, and making a plan for action, were things to be done as quickly as possible so that we could get on with the work.
But, as our means developed for dealing with definitions and plans more precisely, easily, and flexibly, we began to realize that they in reality might be the most significant part of that work.
With our immenseiy increased capability for complex bookkeeping relative to our interlaced hierarchies of objectives, plans, and arguments, we found that defining a new cate gory, searching for members or instances of it, or applying its selection criteria were becoming ever conscious and specific tasks.
"It was easy to form tags and links, and we experimented with the gains to be made by consciously specifying and indicating categories.
The very fact of using this careful classifi cation within our structures allowed us to get more powerful help from the computer in these classification processes.
I should mention that the relationships among the terms in a sentence--the syntax if you wish--had been given further specification tags than those I showed you earlier, to remove ambiguities that hindered the computer from going back to a statement and resolving the syntactical structure.
"The other development upon which this process to be exhibited is based, was stimulated by our realizing that flexible cooperation with the computer was calling for lots of little interactions.
He studied it a moment, then looked at the statements above, picked out a node on the network with the pen, and hit the keyset a few strokes.
Joe studied this, referred to the statements above, flipped through several levels of network portrayals, through a few statements representing a couple of low-level nodes, reflected a moment, and then pointed his light pen at a point on the graduated line, part way between the adjectives, and pressed its button.
It, with some small help from me, is proceeding through a quite complex analysis of the meaning that this incipient concept has to me, and of certain types of mental associations that I may have with it.
I don't have to remember the special rules and forms of analysis involved-- nevertheless, a very sophisticated little capability is mine to use at will, taxing neither me nor the computer."
After a little over a minute of these question-answer interactions, the process apparently terminated, with four lines of special terms remaining on the screen.
The third line lists the names of some previously defined categories or concepts that are the closest to this in meanlng--these before the break were found to overlap, and the rest are just close.
If it can get hold of and manipulate important aspects of the meaning that is contained in our structures, it can develop answers to some questions for which there existed only conceptually implicit data.
With practice and good strategy, asking questions like this proves to be a tremendously effective way to gain comprehension about a structure.
Some of the answers are a bit costly, however--in computer time and charges--and we have to watch the way we ask questions.
Some of our researchers are studying the language and structuring techniques relative to this problem, and they think they see ways to change them to make question answering generally more efficient.
They find that they need to give less and less human concern for the details of structure building--in-fact, the roles have reversed a little.
This process, and some of the past data collected by its use, were becoming an important addition to the planning review sessions, as well as to the continuing development of improved methods.
And apparently, it had a surprisingly positive psychological effect upon members of a cooperating team, where an objective means of relative scoring was thus available.
You have been through an experience that was designed to give you a feel for the sort of future developments that (to us) are predictable from our conceptual framework.
A conceptual framework is offered to help in giving consideration to this hypothesis, and an extensive and personalized projection into possible future developments is presented to help develop a feeling for the possi bilities and promise implicit in the hypothesis and conceptual structure.
If this hypothesis and its glowing extrapolations were borne out in future developments, the consequences would be most exciting and assumedly beneficial to a problem-laden world.
What is called for now is a test of this hypothesis and a calibration on the gains if any that might be realized by giving total-system design attention to human intellectual effectiveness.
If the test and calibration proved to be favorable, then we can set to work developing better and better augmentation systems for our problem solvers.
This should be an empirical approach on a total-system basis--i.e., doing coordinated study and innovation, among all the factors admitted to the problem, in conjunction with experiments that provide realistic action and interplay among these variables.
The recommended en vironment for this empirical, total-system approach, is a laboratory providing a computer-backed display and communication system of the general sort described in Section III-B .
The experimental work of deriving, testing, and integrating innovations into a growing system of augmentation means must have a specific type of human task to try to develop more effectiveness for, to give unifying focus to the research.
We recommend the particular task of computer programming for this purpose--with many reasons behind the selection that should come out in the following discussion.
The programmer works on many problems, including large and realistic ones, which can be solved without interaction with other humans.
Typical and realistic problems for the programmer to solve can be posed for experimental purposes that do not involve large amounts of working and reference in formation.
For example, few other complex solutions or designs beside a program can so easily be given the rigorous test of "Does it actually work?"
Computer programmers are a natural group to be the first in the "real world" to incorporate the type of augmentation means we are considering.
The capability of designing, implementing, and modifying computer programs will be very important to the rate of research progress.
Although no such art exists ready-made for our use, there are many applicable or adaptable tools and techniques to be borrowed from other disciplines.
Because this kind of diagramming can help more later on, we represent in Figure 3 the situation of the beginning research drawing upon existing disciplines for subject matter and tools and techniques.
Goal 1 has been stated as that of verifying the basic hypothesis that concerted augmentation research can increase the intellectual effectiveness of human problem solvers.
Not too long ago we would have recommended (and did), in the spirit of taking the long-range and global approach, that right from the beginning of a serious program of this sort there should be established a careful and scientific methodology.
Controlled experiments, with special re search subjects trained and tested in the use of experimental new aug mentation means, careful monitoring, record-keeping, and evaluative procedures, etc.
This would allow their embryonic and free wheeling "art of doing augmentation research" to grow and work out its kinks through a succession of increasingly complex system problems--and also, redesigning a hierarchy from the bottom up somehow seems the best approach 4f4
4f5a If they are making head way, it won't take any carefully worded criterion of effectiveness nor any great sophistication in measurement technique to tell that they are more effective with the augmentation means than without--being quicker to "design and build" a running program to meet given processing specifications or being quicker to pick up a complex existing program, gain comprehension as necessary, and find its flaws or rebuild it.
What we are recommending in a way is that the augmented capability hierarchy built by this group represent more a quick and rough scaffolding than a carefully engineered structure.
For instance, key concepts held initially, that would have been laboriously riveted into the well-engineered structure, could well be rendered obsolete by the "view" obtained from higher in the hierarchy.
We would suggest establishing a sub-activity within A 1, whose purpose and responsibility is to keep an eye on the total activity, assess and evaluate its progress and try to provide orientation as to where things stand and where attention might be beneficial.
The research of A 1 could probably spiral upwards indefinitely, but once the hypothesis (see Section IV-A ) has been reasonably verified and the first of our stated objectives satisfied, it would be best to re-organize the program.
To Activity A 2 assign the job of developing augmentation means to be used specifically as tools and techniques by the researchers of both A 2 and A 3.
A 2 will now set up a sub-activity that studies the problems of all the workers in A 2 and A 3 and isolates a succession of capabilities for which the research of A 2 will develop means to augment.
To Activity A 3 assign the job of developing augmentation systems that can be practically adopted into real-world problem situations.
Activity A 3 will need a subactivity to study its potential users and guide the succession of developments that it pursues.
Activity A 2 in its continued pursuit of increased effectiveness among workers in idealized environment, will be the source for basic subject matter in the developments of A 3, as well as for its tools and techniques.
From the continously expanding knowledge and developments of A 2, A 3 can organize successive practical systems suitable for ever more general utilization.
We have assumed that what was developed in A 1 was primarily language and methodology, with the artifacts not being subject to appreciable modification during the research.
To the human, the computer represents a special instrument which can display to him a comprehensible image of any characteristic of this structure that may be of interest.
The validity of this and other conjectures stemming from our conceptual framework could represent critical questions to manufacturers of information systems.
To carry this to something of a final view, relative to the research recommendations, we present Figure 5 , which should be largely self-explanatory by this time.
Suggested relationship among the major activities in achieving the stated objective (essentially, of significantly boosting human power in A 4 and U 1).
Give CAUG-I to a real-world problem solver in almost any discipline, and he has the basic capabilities for structuring his arguments and plans, organizing special files, etc., that almost anyone could expect to need.
An hypothesis has been stated that the intellectual effectiveness of a human can be significantly improved by an engineering-like approach toward redesigning changeable components of a system.
A conceptual framework has been constructed that helps provide a way of looking at the implications and possibilities surrounding and stemming from this hypothesis.
Briefly, this framework provides the realization that our intellects are already augmented by means which appear to have the following characteristics: 5a2
The capabilities of prime interest are those associated with manipulating symbols and concepts in support of organizing and executing processes from which are ultimately derived human comprehension and problem solutions.
The automation of the symbol manipulation associated with the minute-by-minute mental processes seems to offer a logical next step in the evolution of our intellectual capability.
A picture of the implications and promise of this framework has been described, based upon direct human communication with a computer.
Here the many ways in which the computer could be of service, at successive levels of augmented capability, have been brought out.
An approach has been outlined for testing the hypothesis of Item (1) and for pursuing the "rich and significant gains" which we feel are promised.
This goal is fostered by the recommendation of incorporating positive feedback into the research development--i.e., concentrating a good share of the basic-research attention upon augmenting those capabilities in a human that are needed in the augmentation-research workers.
The real-world applications would be pursued by designing a succession of systems for specialists, whose progression corresponds to the increasing generality of the capabilities for which coordinated augmentation means have been evolved.
First any possibility for improving the effective utilization of the intellectual power of society's problem solvers warrants the most serious consideration.
Any possibility for evolving an art or science that can couple directly and significantly to the continued development of that resource should warrant doubly serious consideration.
This is an open plea to researchers and to those who ultimately motivate, finance, or direct them, to turn serious attention toward the possibility of evolving a dynamic discipline that can-treat the problem of improving intellectual effectiveness in a total sense.
1 in the list at the end of the report) bring out the importance of the conceptual framework to the process of research.
Ref-5: Whorf, B. L., Language, Thought, and Reality (MIT & John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York City, N.Y., 1956).
Ref-8: McCarthy, J., "LISP 1.5 Programmer's Manual," Computation Center and Research Laboratory of Electronics, MIT (14 July 1961).
Ref-10: Yngve, V. H., "Introduction to COMIT Programming," Technical Report, Research Laboratories of Electronics and Computation Center, MIT (5 November 1961).
Ref-11: Yngve, V. H., "COMIT Programmer's Reference Manual," Technical Report, Research Laboratories of Electronics and Computation Center, MIT (5 November 1961).
Ref-22: Culler, G. J. and Huff, R. W., "Solution of Non-Linear Integral Equations Using On-Line Computer Control," Ramo-Wooldridge, Canoga Park, California, paper for presentation at SJCC, San Francisco (May 1962).
Ref-24: Teager, H. M., "Systems Considerations in Real-Time Computer Usage," paper presented at ONR Symposium on Automated Teaching (12 October 1961).
Ref-25: Randa, Glenn C., "Design of a Remote Display Console," Report ESL, R-132, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts (available through ASTIA) (February 1962).
