Author: Douglas C. Engelbart
Created: August 29, 2001
Modified: October 1962
SRI Summary Report AFOSR-3223 •
Prepared for: Director of Information Sciences, Air Force
Office of Scientific Research, Washington DC,
Contract AF 49(638)-1024 •
SRI Project No.
Click here for scan of the original printed report (pdf)
Increased capability in this respect is taken to mean a mixture of the following: more-rapid comprehension, better comprehension, the possibility of gaining a useful degree of comprehension in a situation that previously was too complex, speedier solutions, better solutions, and the possibility of finding solutions to problems that before seemed insoluble.
We do not speak of isolated clever tricks that help in particular situations.
Man's population and gross product are increasing at a considerable rate, but the complexity of his problems grows still faster, and the urgency with which solutions must be found becomes steadily greater in response to the increased rate of activity and the increasingly global nature of that activity.
Augmenting man's intellect, in the sense defined above, would warrant full pursuit by an enlightened society if there could be shown a reasonable approach and some plausible benefits.
The style of Section III seems to make for easier reading.
He is designing a building.
The surveying data for the layout he is working on now have already been entered, and he has just coaxed the clerk to show him a perspective view of the steep hillside building site with the roadway above, symbolic representations of the various trees that are to remain on the lot, and the service tie points for the different utilities.
With a "pointer," he indicates two points of interest, moves his left hand rapidly over the keyboard, and the distance and elevation between the points indicated appear on the right- hand third of the screen.
Ignoring the representation on the display, the architect next begins to enter a series of specifications and data--a six-inch slab floor, twelve-inch concrete walls eight feet high within the excavation, and so on.
He often recalls from the "clerk" his working lists of specifications and considerations to refer to them, modify them, or add to them.
Prescribing different planes here and there, curved surfaces occasionally, and moving the whole structure about five feet, he finally has the rough external form of the building balanced nicely with the setting and he is assured that this form is basically compatible with the materials to be used as well as with the function of the building.
He enters particular fixture designs, and examines them in a particular room.
Next he begins a functional analysis.
He has a list of the people who will occupy this building, and the daily sequences of their activtites.
The "clerk" allows him to follow each in turn, examining how doors swing, where special lighting might be needed.
All of this information (the building design and its associated "thought structure") can be stored on a tape to represent the design manual for the building.
We have placed the following specifications on this framework: 1b1
That it be a basis for evaluating the possible relevance of work and knowledge from existing fields and for assimilating whatever is relevant.
Two points need emphasis here.
Further search, and actual research, are needed for the evolution of the framework.
The entire effect of an individual on the world stems essentially from what he can transmit to the world through his limited motor channels.
), and that involving the unconscious processing and mediating of received and self-generated information, and the unconscious mediating of conscious processing itself.
The explicit new system we contemplate will involve as artifacts computers, and computer-controlled information-storage, information-handling, and information-display devices.
While an untrained aborigine cannot drive a car through traffic, because he cannot leap the gap between his cultural background and the kind of world that contains cars and traffic, it is possible to move step by step through an organized training program that will enable him to drive effectively and safely.
No person uses a process that is completely unique every time he tackles something new.
Furthermore, even quite different higher order processes may have in common relatively high-order sub-processes".
For example, he makes use of planning, composing, dictating.
There is a definite way in which these sub-processes will be organized that represents part of the system methodology.
However, the very process of organizing and supervising the utilization of these sub-process capabilities is itself a most important sub-process of the memo-writing process.
Hence, the sub- process capabilities as listed would not be complete without the addition of a seventh capability--what we call the executive capability.
This is the capability stemming from habit, strategy, rules of thumb, prejudice, learned method, intuition, unconscious dictates, or combinations thereof, to call upon the appropriate sub-process capabilities with a particular sequence and timing.
But the printing mechanism is more complicated; besides printing a visible character at every stroke, it adds special encoding features by means of invisible selective components in the ink and special shaping of the character.
The signals which this reading stylus sends through the flexible connecting wire to the writing machine are used to determine which characters are being sensed and thus to cause the automatic typing of a duplicate string of characters.
This writing machine would permit you to use a new process of composing text.
If the tangle of thoughts represented by the draft became too complex, you would compile a reordered draft quickly.
You can integrate your new ideas more easily, and thus harness your creativity more continuously, if you can quickly and flexibly change your working record.
This one innovation could trigger a rather extensive redesign of this hierarchy; your way of accomplishing many of your tasks would change considerably.
Individuals who operate effectively in our culture have already been considerably "augmented."
Many of the external composing and manipulating (modifying, rearranging) processes serve such characteristically "human" activities as playing with forms and relationships to ask what develops, cut- and-try multiple-pass development of an idea, or listing items to reflect on and then rearranging and extending them as thoughts develop.
The guided evolutionary process could be expected to be considerably more rapid than the traditional one.
The category of "more radical innovations" includes the digital computer as a tool for the personal use of an individual.
Here there is not only promise of great flexibility in the composing and rearranging of text and diagrams before the individual's eyes but also promise of many other process capabilities that can be integrated into the H-LAM/T system's repertoire hierarchy.
The first level down would organize functions corresponding to statements in a problem-oriented language (e.g., ALGOL or COBOL), to achieve the desired over-all process.
Device engineers and physicists of different kinds could take us down through more layers.
If there is any one thing upon which this 'intelligence depends' it would seem to be organization .
(The term is attributed originally to W. Ross Ashby ( 2 , 3 ).
Accepting the term "intelligence amplification" does not imply any attempt to increase native human intelligence.
What we have done in the development of our augmentation means is to construct a superstructure that is a synthetic extension of the natural structure upon which it is built.
The human and the artifacts are the only physical components in the H-LAM/T system.
It is upon their capabilities that the ultimate capability of the system will depend.
This was implied in the earlier statement that every composite process of the system decomposes ultimately into explicit-human and explicit-artifact processes.
In any composite process, there is cooperative interaction between the two domains, requiring interchange of energy (much of it for information exchange purposes only).
Figure 1 depicts this two domain concept and embodies other concepts discussed below.
However, the "man-artifact interface" has existed for centuries, ever since humans began using artifacts and executing composite processes.
Exchange across this "interface" occurs when an explicit-human process is coupled to an explicit-artifact process.
Again, special processes are often designed to accommodate this exchange.
Before we pursue further direct discussion of the H-LAM/T system, let us examine some background material.
(1) Concept Manipulation --Humans rose above the lower forms of life by evolving the biological capability for developing abstractions and concepts.
They could manipulate these concepts within their minds to a certain extent, and think about situations in the abstract.
Of all the aspects of the pending event, the spilling of the coffee and the squashing of the pastry somehow are abstracted immediately, and associated with a concept of personal responsibility and a dislike for these consequences.
This supplemented the individual's memory and ability to visualize.
Apparently there are counter-arguments to this; e.g., if a concept needs to be used often but its expression is difficult, then the language will evolve to ease the situation.
If this is true, and if language is (as it seems to be) a part of a selforganizing system, then it seems probable that the state of a language at a given time strongly affects its own evolution to a succeeding state.
The English language since Shakespeare has undergone no alteration comparable to the alteration in the cultural environment; if it had, Shakespeare would no longer be accessible to us.
It seems very likely that a more useful language form can be devised.
We then want to determine the useful modifications in the language and in the way of thinking that could result.
This suggests a fourth stage to the evolution of our individual-human intellectual capability: 2c4i
These hypotheses imply great richness in the new evolutionary spaces opened by progressing from Stage 3 to Stage 4.
This allowed an empirical approach which proved both simple and effective.
We thus performed the following experiment.
We fastened a pencil to a brick and experimented.
Figure 2 shows the results, compared with typewriting and ordinary pencil writing.
If we want to hurry the writing, we have to make it larger.
For one thing, the record keeping that enables the organization of commerce and government would probably have taken a form so different from what we know that our social structure would undoubtedly have evolved differently.
Assume that the individual cartridges sold by manufacturers (publishers) contained the look-up information, that one cartridge could hold the equivalent of an unabridged dictionary, and that a one-paragraph definition could always be located and displayed on the face of the device by the average practised individual in less than three seconds.
Because we are exploring for perspective, and not yet recommending research activities, we are free to discuss and define in more detail what we mean by "basic capability", without regard to the amount of research involved in making an actual inventory.
What would be basic in this case would perhaps be the processes whereby strength could be increased and coordinated movement patterns learned, as well as the basic movement range established by the mechanical-limit loci of the muscle-tendon-bone system.
Similar capability breakdowns will occur for sensory and cognitive capabilities.
We don't know whether a mental structure is developed in a manner analogous to (a) development of a garden, where one provides a good environment, plants the seeds, keeps competing weeds and injurious pests out, but otherwise has to let natural processes take their course, or to (b) development of a basketball team, where much exercise of skills, patterns, and strategies must be provided so that natural processes can slowly knit together an integration, or to (c) development of a machine, where carefully formed elements are assembled in a precise, planned manner so that natural phenomena can immediately yield planned function.
What we mean to emphasize is that pursuit of our objective need not wait upon the understanding of the mental processes that accomplish (what we call) mental structuring and that derive behavior therefrom.
Concepts seem to be structurable, in that a new concept can be composed of an organization of established concepts.
We are generally used to thinking of our symbol structures as a pattern of marks on a sheet of paper.
What the computer actually stores need be none of our concern, assuming that it can portray symbol structures to us that are consistent with the form in which we think our information is structured.
But let the human specify to the instrument his particular conceptual need of the moment, relative to this internal image.
My successive actions throughout my working day are meant to cooperate toward a certain over-all professional goal.
This interdependence actually has a cyclic, regenerative nature to it which is very significant to us.
All of this means that a significant improvement in symbol-structure manipulation through better process structuring (initially perhaps through much better artifacts) should enable us to develop improvements in concept and mental-structure manipulations that can in turn enable us to organize and execute symbol-manipulation processes of increased power.
Consider a given capability (Capability 1) at some level in the repertoire hierarchy.
There seems to be a sort of standard grouping of lower-order capabilities from which this is composed, and these exist in two classes--what we might call the executive class and what we might call the direct-contributive class.
In the direct-contributive class we find the capabilities organized by the executive class toward the direct realization of Capability 1.
It was the executive processes that comprehended the situation, directed a lower-order executive-process that the receiver be picked up and, when the receiver was in place (first process accomplished), directed the next process, the saying hello.
This type of automatic capability need only be summoned by a higher executive process in order for trained automatic responses to execute it.
To call someone on the telephone, I must consciously comprehend the need for this process and how I can execute it, I must consciously pick up the directory and search for the name and telephone number, and I must consciously direct the dialing of the number.
That telephone call is a subprocess in the middle of the process of calling a committee meeting.
The executive superstructure is necessary because humans do not operate by magic, but even a necessary superstructure is a burden.
We can readily recognize that there are many ways to organize and manage such a superstructure, resulting in vastly different degrees of efficiency in the application of the workers' talents.
The question now becomes how to distribute that talent between superstructure and workers to get the most total production.
The efficiency of organization within the superstructure is now doubly important so that a minimum of talent in the superstructure produces a maximum of organizational efficiency in directing the productivity of the remaining talent.
Today this individual cannot be depended upon to have any special training for many of these roles; he is likely to have learned them by cut and try and by indirect imitation.
A complex process is often executed by the H-LAM/T system in a multi-pass fashion (i.e., cut and try).
In the model using a network of contractors, this type of procedure would entail a great deal of extra work within the superstructure--each contractor involved in the process would have the specifications upon which he bid continually changed, and would continually have to respond to the changes by restudying the situation, changing his plans, changing the specifications to his subcontractors, and changing his records.
It is hard enough to develop an initial structure of diagrams and text, but the amount of effort required to make changes is often prohibitively great; one settles for inflexibility.
There are several such factors which merit special attention.
Another factor can exert this type of compound effect upon over-all system performance: the human's unconscious processes.
This may be one of the very significant problems whose solution awaits our development of increased intellectual effectiveness.
Many of the examples are realizable today (in fact, some have been realized) and most of the rest are reasonably straight forward extrapolations into the near future.
An early paper, offering suggestions toward augmenting the human intellect, that fits well and significantly within the framework which we have developed was written by Vannevar Bush 6 in 1945.
He wrote as World War II was coming to an end, and his principal purpose seemed to be to offer new professional objectives to those scientists who were soon to be freed from war-motivated research and development.
Then he brought out some general considerations for hope: "..
But there are signs of a change as new and powerful instrumentalities come into use...Photocells...advanced photography...thermionic tubes... cathode ray tubes...relay combinations...there are plenty of mechanical aids with which to effect a transformation in scientific records."
"...The world has arrived at an age of cheap complex devices of great reliability and something is bound to come of it."
They employ a symbolism which grew like Topsy and has little consistency; a strange fact in that most logical field.")
And "...Then, on beyond the strict logic of the mathematician, lies the application of logic in everyday affairs.
Then " ..So much for the manipulation of ideas and their insertion into the record.
This material is so relevant and so well put that I quote it in its entirety: 3a5f
A memex is a device in which an individual stores all his books, records, and communications, and which is mechanized so that it may be consulted with exceeding speed and flexibility.
It is an enlarged intimate supplement to his memory.
"It consists of a desk, and while it can presumably be operated from a distance, it is primarily the piece of furniture at which he works.
Otherwise it looks like an ordinary desk.
The matter of bulk is well taken care of by improved microfilm.
Only a small part of the interior of the memex is devoted to storage, the rest to mechanism.
Books of all sorts, pictures, current periodicals, newspapers, are thus obtained and dropped into place.
Business correspondence takes the same path.
And there is provision for direct entry.
Moreover, he has supplemental levers.
Deflection to the left gives him the same control backwards.
"A special button transfers him immediately to the first page of the index.
Any given book of his library can thus be called up and consulted with far greater facility than if it were taken from a shelf.
As he has several projection positions, he can leave one item in position while he calls up another.
He can add marginal notes and comments, taking advantage of one possible type of dry photography, and it could even be arranged so that he can do this by a stylus scheme, such as is now employed in the telautograph seen in railroad waiting rooms, just as though he had the physical page before him.
This is the essential feature of the memex.
At the bottom of each there are a number of blank code spaces, and a pointer is set to indicate one of these on each item.
The user taps a single key, and the items are permanently joined.
In each code space appears the code word.
Specifically he is studying why the short Turkish bow was apparently superior to the English long bow in the skirmishes of the Crusades.
First he runs through an encyclopedia, finds and interesting but sketchy article, leaves it projected, Next, in a history, he finds another pertinent item, and ties the two together.
He inserts a page of longhand analysis of his own.
A touch brings up the code book.
Tapping a few keys projects the head of the trail.
"Wholly new forms of encyclopedias will appear, ready-made with a mesh of associative trails running through them, ready to be dropped into the memex and there amplified.
The chemist, struggling with the synthesis of an organic compound, has all the chemical literature before him in his laboratory, with trails following the analogies of compounds, and side trails to their physical and chemical behavior.
The inheritance from the master becomes, not only his additions to the world's record, but for his disciples the entire scaffolding by which they were erected.
Is it not possible that some day the path may be established more directly?
We know further that if we can approach that cable with the proper instruments, we do not need to touch it; we can pick up those vibrations by electrical induction and thus discover and reproduce the scene which is being transmitted, just as a telephone wire may be tapped for its message.
"The impulse which flow in the arm nerves of a typist convey to her fingers the translated information which reaches her eye or ear, in order that the fingers may be caused to strike the proper keys.
"By bone conduction we already introduce sounds into the nerve channels of the deaf in order that they may hear.
With a couple of electrodes on the skull the encephalograph now produces pen-and-ink traces which bear some relation to the electrical phenomena going on in the brain itself.
Must we always transform to mechanical movements in order to proceed from one electrical phenomenon to another?
It is a suggestive thought, but it hardly warrants prediction without losing touch with reality and immediateness.
His excursion may be more enjoyable if he can reacquire the privilege of forgetting the manifold things he does not need to have immediately at hand, with some assurance that he can find them again if they prove important.
They may yet allow him truly to encompass the great record and to grow in the wisdom of race experience.
None of the principles of indexing or sorting used here is new: coordinate-indexing descriptors with direct coding on edge notched cards, with needle-sort retrieval.
These notecards represent much more than just an in formation file.
They provide a workspace for me, in which I can browse, make additions or corrections, or build new sets of thought kernels with a good deal of freedom.
I can do document-reference searches with good efficiency, too, by needle sorting for notes within relevant descriptor categories Any notecard with relevant notes on it points to the original source (by the source serial number, which I always write, together with the page, at the top of the card).
One need arose quite commonly as trains of thought would develop on a growing series of note cards.
There was no convenient way to link these cards together so that the train of thought could later be recalled by extracting the ordered series of notecards.
Suppose that one wants to link Card B to Card A, to make a trail from A to B.
It's not unreasonable to assume that establishing a link would take about three seconds, and tracing a link to the next card about three to five seconds.
Right off the bat I noticed that there were two distinct groups--some ideas were about what the memo ought to accomplish, what time period it should cover, when it should be finished, what level and style of presentation should be used, etc., and some ideas were about the sub ject of the memo.
As more thoughts developed, I found that the latter group also divided into ideas representing possible content and those representing possible organization.
I started with the Specification group (it being the "highest" in nature), and immediately found that there were several types of notes within that group Just as there had been in the total group.
But there were also considerations about what these final statements might include or exclude or take into account, or conditions under which inclusion or modification might be relevant, or statements that were too bulky or brief or imprecise to be used as final statements.
So I went ahead, keeping the groups and sub-groups of cards separated, and trying to organize and develop them.
This type of device should not be too hard to develop and produce for a price that a professional man could justify paying, and it would certainly facilitate some valuable symbol-structuring pro 3a7e4
Statements very often had implicit linkages to other statements in the same group, and it would have been very useful to keep track of these associations.
For instance, when several consideration statements bore upon a given product statement, and when that product statement came to be modified through some other consideration, it was not always easy to remember why it had been establishe has it had.
Being able to fish out the other considerations linked to that statement would have helped considerably.
Also, trial organizations of the statements in a group could be linked into trial associative trails, so that a number of such organizations could be constructed and considered without copying that many sets of specially ordered statements.
However, the technological trends of today foretell the obsolescence of such electromechanical information handling equipment.
The relative limitations of the mechanical equipment in providing processes which could be usefully inte grated into the system would soon lead to its replacement by electronic computer equipment.
A computer is directly capable of performing any of a basic repertoire of very primitive symbol-manipulation processes (such as "move the symbol in location A to location 12417," or "compare the symbol in location A with that in location B, and if they are the same, set switch S to ON").
Computers have been used to simulate dynamic systems for which we humans had none but descriptive models, from which we otherwise could gain little feel for the way the system behaves.
Here, though, each substructure could also be a list of substructures, and each of these could also, etc.
Their standard manner for organizing the data which the computer was to operate upon is thus what they term "list structuring."
They also developed special languages to descrlbe different basic processes involved in list-structure manipulation.
A continuously rotating magnetic drum can hold perhaps a million of these symbols, for which access to a random storage position may average a thirtieth of a second (waiting for the drum to come around to bring that storage position under the magnetic reading head).
Such block-transfer is accomplished by a relatively small structure of primitive computer processes that cyclically executes the transfer of one word at a time until the designated block has been trans ferred.
Magnetic tapes are commonly used for backup storage, too.
For one reel, storage space for each such symbol cost about two-thirds of a cent, but for twenty full reels in a "library" the cost comes down to about one-thirtieth of a cent per symbol space.
Within the next ten years there would seem to be a very high probability of significant ad vances to this end.
It is possible to describe to the computer, and thereafter use, new symbols of arbitrary shape and size.
A cathode-ray-tube display of this sort is currently limited in resolution to about 800 lines across the face of the tube (in either direction).
One sbould expect these prices to be lowered quite drastically as our technology improves and the market for these displays increases.
For communicating to the computer, considerable freedom exists in arranging pushbuttons, switches, and keysets for use by the human.
In the second category, there have been a few papers published recently describing actual work that bears directly upon our topic.
Licklider and Clark, ( 21 ) and Culler and Huff, ( 22 ) in the 1962 Spring Joint Computer Conference, gave what are essentially progress reports of work going on now in exactly this sort of thing--a human with a computer backed display getting minute-by-minute help in solving problems.
There are several efforts that we have heard about, but for which there are either no publications or for which none have been discovered by us.
We have recently learned that a graduate student at MIT, Glenn Randa, ( 25 ) has developed the design of a remote display console under Ross for his graduate thesis project.
Termed the JOHNNIAC Open-Shop System (JOSS for short), it apparently is near completion, and will use remote type writer stations.
Such oversight has not been intentional, and it is hoped that these researchers will make their pertinent work known to us.
Let us consider some specific possibilities for redesigning the augmentation means for an intellectually oriented, problem-solving human.
In fact, even if we in some way could know now what would emerge after say, ten years of research, it is likely that any but a general description would be difficult to express in today's terminology.
Joe has two display screens side by side, but one of them he doesn't seem to use as much as the other.
And the screens are almost horizontal, more like the surface of a drafting table than the near-vertical picture displays you had somehow imagined.
"To give you a feel for what goes on, I'm going to start discussing and demonstrating some of the very basic operations and notions I've been using.
You've read the stuff about process and process-capability hierarchies, I'm sure.
I know from past experience in explaining radical augmentation systems to people that the new and powerful higher-level capabilities that they are interested in--because basically those are what we are all anxious to improve--can't really be explained to them without first giving them some understanding of the new and powerful capabilities upon which they are built.
Joe said that it was thus quite feasible to learn and use the single-stroke abbreviations for about half of the words he used, but beyond that each added percent began to require him to have too many abbreviations under his command.
But he said that there were a lot of word endings, letter pairs (diagrams), and letter triplets (trigrams) that were so common as to make it pay to abbreviate them to a single stroke.
He claimed that he could comfortably rattle off about 180 words a minute--faster than he could comfortably talk.
Joe said that there were other miscellaneous simple features, and some quite sophisticated features to help the composition process.
The frame full of your transcribed speech was still showing, and it represented the clumsy phrasing and illogical progression of thought so typical of extemporaneous speech.
With but slightly more motion of his light pen, he could similarly delete any string of words or letters.
The text would all still look as neat as if freshly retyped.
The middle separator line was moved toward the shorter piece of text, and the line lengths of the two sections were adjusted so that they occupied the same length along the dlsplay frame.
Confused?
Have you even seen a 'scrambled-text' programmed instruction book?
"But a more typical case might find A to be an independent statement, B dependent upon A, C and D independent, E depending upon D and B, E dependent upon C, and F dependent upon A, D, and E. See, sequential but not serial?
With the new symbol-manipulating methods here, we have terrific flexibility for matching the two, and boy, it really pays off in the way you can tie into your work.
As it turns out, that is just what he intends to do.
He mercilessly ignores your obvious discomfort and gives you no cue to stop, until he drops his hands to his lap after he has filled five frames with these statements (the surplus filled frames disappeared to somewhere--you assume Joe knows where they went and how to get them back).
"You notice how you wandered down different short paths, and criss-crossed yourself a few times?"
But he isn't needling you.
"Perhaps I should have stopped sooner--I am supposed to be coaching you instead of teasing you--but I had a reason.
You started out pretty much the way you might with your typewriter or pencil.
Somehow we implicitly view most all of our methods as just sort of 'the way things are done, that's all.'
You knew that some exotic techniques were going to be applied, and you'll have to admit that you were passively waiting for them to be handed to you."
With a non-committal nod, you suggest getting on with it.
What I'm trying to prime you for, though, is the realization that the impressive new tricks all are based upon lots of changes in the little things you do.
You'll stick with him.
"Insert what I say next there, after that sentence."
You reflected that this flexible cut-and-try process really did appear to match the way you seemed to develop your thoughts.
He said that most links possessed a direction, i.e., they were like an arrow pointing from one substructure to another, so that in setting up a link he must specify the two substructures in a given order.
A few strokes on the keyset and suddenly the sentence fell to pieces--different parts of it being positioned here and there, with some lines connecting them.
"Remember diagramming sentences when you were studying grammar?
I don't want to tangle you up with too much detail, though.
You can see, probably, that quick dictionary-lookup helps."
And he showed you also how you could link secondary phrases (or sentences) to parts of the statement for more detailed description.
These secondary substructures wouldn't appear when you normally viewed the statement, but could be brought in by simple request if you wanted closer study.
Sort of like being able to use structural members that are lighter and stronger--it gives you new freedom in building structures.
But let's move on--we'll come back to this area later, if we have time.
"When you look at a statement and ask, 'How come?
Joe then had you designate an order of "importance to comprehension" among these statements, and he rearranged them accordingly as fast as you could choose them.
(This choosing was remarkably helped by having only the remainder statements to study for each new choice--another little contribution to effectiveness, you thought.)
"Each primary antecedent can similarly be linked to its primary antecedents, and so on, until you arrive at the statements representing the premises, the accepted facts, and the objectives upon which this argument had been established.
We already have links to these consequents--just turn around the arrows on the antecedent links and we have consequent links.
Then another keyed-in request to the computer, and almost instantaneously there appeared a network of lines and dots that looked something like a tree--except that sometimes branches would fuse together.
The antecedents of one statement always lie above that statement-- or rather, their nodes lie above its node.
When you get used to using a network representation like this, it really becomes a great help in getting the feel for the way all the different ideas and reasoning fit together-- that is, for the conceptual structuring."
Joe demonstrated some ways in which you could make use of the diagram to study the argument structure.
I can do this several ways.
The statements that were on the second screen now each had its respective serial number sitting next to it in the left margin.
We have also evolved some handy techniques for constructing abbreviation labels that help your memory quite a bit.
It is a lot like using zones of variable magnification as you scan the structure--higher magnification where you are inspecting detail, lower magnification in the surrounding field so that your feel for the whole structure and where you are in it can stay with you."
There may be many levels of substructuring between the level of individual symbols and that represented by the entire collection.
But at any such level, the manner in which the interrelationship between the kernels of argument can be tagged, portrayed, studied and manipulated is much the same as those which we have just been through.
Substructures that represent graphs, curves, engineering drawings, and other graphical forms can likewise be integrated.
The associative trails that Bush suggested represent a primitive example of this.
It is rather like having to project three-dimensional images onto two-dimensional frames and to work with them there instead of in their natural form.
I guess that's a natural feeling, though.
One gets impatlent any tlme he is forced into a restrlcted or primitive mode of operation--except perhaps for recreatlonal purposes.
Some of these techniques are quite closely related to those used in automated-instruction programming--perhaps you know about 'teaching machines?'
It is so nice to be able to tear it apart, establish our own definitions and substitute, restructure, append notes, and so forth, in pursuit of comprehension, that it was generally well worth the trouble.
The keyset shorthand made this reasonably practical.
The references are available for study in original serial form on our screens, but any structuring and tagging done by a previous reader, or ourselves, can also be utilized.
It sits in the archives like an orange rind, with most of the real juice squeezed out.
The analysis and digestion that any of us makes on such a reference is fully available to the others.
There was a slight pause while Joe apparently was reflecting upon something.
From what we've been through so far, you might expect it to be like that.
And an independent problem solver certainly has to have this capability.
Well, we can't analyze the old ways of doing things very accurately to check his estimated figures, but we certainly have come to be in general sympathy with his stand.
But, what he finally had on the display frame was quite different from the argument statements you had seen.
"In explaining symbol-structuring to you, I used the likely questions, 'What's this?'
'What effect will that have?'
Let's take a quick look at some of the ways you can get help in answering them.
"The language used to compose these process-description stateme for the computer is considerably more compact and precise than is a natural language, such as English, and there is correspondingly less advantage to be gained by appending special links and tags for giving us humans a better grasp of their meaning.
But this portrayal doesn't stem from special appended information, it can be laid out like this automatically by the computer, just from the cues it gets from the necessary symbol components of the statement.
It consists of lists of compactly abbreviated statements, and some condensed notes about their effects.
"I know that you have less prevlous familiarity with the nature of programs than you do wlth the nature of arguments, so I'll just give you a few quick views of what these process-structure schematic portrayals look like, and not try to explain them in any detail.
You saw how this could be facilitated by our symbol-structuring techniques.
It is based upon the fact that the process-description language for the computer is formal and precise.
The structuring here differs from that of a computer process mainly in the sophistication of the sub-processes which can be specified for the human to do.
"But to be more specific--we find that setting up objectives, deslgning a method of approach, and then implementing that method are of course our fundamental operating sequence--done over and over again in the many levels of our activity.
But perhaps more important to us is the difference in the way we work with composite-process structures.
Here is a crude but succinct way to put this.
For instance, we provide him as much help as possible in making a plan of action.
Then we give him as much help as we can in carrying it out.
But we also have to allow him to change his mind at almost any point, and to want to modify his plans.
Now, as part of my regular practice, I spend about five minutes out of each hour exercising with this package.
This once-an-hour review for me now might compare with a once-a-day review for you, as far as the distance travelled between reviews is concerned.
It is designed so that there will be a good chance for these scraps later to be usefully integrated.
Comparison with other working domains would be helpful, perhaps.
If you were an inventor of useful mechanisms, you would like to have a wide range of materials-processing and shaping techniques available to you.
This would give you more freedom and more interesting possibilities in the way you worked and designed.
But this wasn't all that was included in the subscription.
There would be a specialist assigned to you, instantly available for consultation and help whenever you requested it.
He wouldn't have high-level theoretical trainlng.
"A lot of questions you might ask he couldn't answer directly, but in such a case he could often lead you quickly to some relevant pages in his books.
But this wasn't so bad.
Then the processes which were too much for him would be done by the two of you together.
Your helper would keep track of the complex procedure and execute all the steps he could.
When he came to a step that was too big for him, he would hand you enough information to allow you to take that step, whereupon he would take over again until he met another such step.
"As an inventor and builder of devices that solve needs, you could become a great deal more versatile and productive, applying your imagination, intuition, judgment, and intelligence very effectively over a much wider range of possibilities.
"So let's turn back to the working domain which we are considering here.
These esoteric disciplines could very possibly contribute specialized processes and techniques to a general worker in the intellectual domain: Formal logic--mathematics of many varieties, including statistics-- decision theory--game theory--time and motion analysis--operations research--classification theory--documentation theory--cost accounting, for time, energy, or money--dynamic programming--computer programming.
Realize that there is also a correspondingly large list of specialized materials potentially usable in the fabrications of the intellectual worker.
Not only that, but to provide an accurate analogy, we have to give him a computer to help him organize and monitor his activity and assess his results.
This may be to ponder or go searching, true enough--we aren't saying that the steps are necessarily straightforward.
"And then, for beating away at the roadblock, my bookkeeping regarding what I've tried, what possibilities I've collected, and what my assumptions and objectives are, is good enough to help tremendously in keeping me from getting into loops and quandaries,in carefully ex hausting possibilities, and in really analyzing my assumptions and objectives.
What's more, I'm not generating reams of cyclic arguments, lists, calculations, or the like--either I'm checking the validity of what I've already structured, or I am correcting or expanding the structure.
Also, I set up a sentinel process that will operate in the future to help alert me to concepts which may clear the block.
And I can turn right around and apply this toward improving my abllity for structuring argumentg and processes.
"Let me mention another bonus feature that wasn't easily fore seen.
They can all work on the same symbol structure, wherever they might wish.
If any two want to work simultaneously on the same material, they simply duplicate and each starts reshaping his version--and later it is easy to merge their contributions.
"No one can dominate the show, since seldom do you have to 'listen' to the person concurrent to the developments he is pursuing-- and yet at any time another person can tune in on what he has done and is doing.
It gets to be like a real whing-ding free-for-all--tremendously stimulating and satisfying, and things really get done.
You find yourself 'playing over your head' almost all of the time.
"We have been experimenting with multi-disciplinary teams and are becoming especially excited over the results.
I haven't been complete because we won't have the time.
"For instance, we began to find it more and more useful to distinguish different categories or types of process, different types of arguments, different types of relationships, and different types of descriptions.
For a specific example, Ranganathan 1 once cited five specific relationships that could obtain between two terms, where one modifies the other.
He called these phase relations, and named how one term could relate to the other as either biasing it, being a tool used to study it, being an aspect of it, being in comparison with it, or influencing it.
There are even more categories mentioned in the literature.
"Let me demonstrate one of the advanced processes which has evolved.
Our working repertoire of small-task requests for computer service was getting quite large, and it was proving to be extremely valuable to use them and to be able to remember automatically their procedures and designation codes.
I want to give it a name--a short and meaningful one--and I want a good definition.
Watch what happens."
Another statement flashed on almost immediately, with two familiar adjectives placed below and a graduated line between them.
"Actually, right now I'm demonstrating a cooperative process execution technique.
"This first line gives me two suggested names for this category or concept.
The second line furnishes me with an association chain to use for a mnemonic aid in remembering the new name-- linking the name to several characteristics of the concept.
The name itself was selected under mnemonic criteria, as well as to have a structure that goes with its syntactic and semantic categories.
It proves rather inflexible and awkward to use for speaking, but it provides plenty of flexibility and power for expressing things in the visual-symbol forms that we use.
This finds approval and faith in all of us here, but it is going a bit slowly.
And apparently, it had a surprisingly positive psychological effect upon members of a cooperating team, where an objective means of relative scoring was thus available.
Let yourself be disengaged now from your role in the above discussion-demonstration.
The question of limiting these factors is considered later in the section.
There should be no stinting on the capabilities provided--it is very important to learn what value any given artifact feature may offer the total system, and the only way to learn the value is to experiment with the feature.
Where economy demands that a computer not be idle during the time the augmented subject is not using it (which would be a rather large net fraction of the time, probably), and where sharing the computer with other real-time users for which demand delays are a problem, then the only sharing that should be considered is that with off-line computations for which there are no real-time service demands to be met.
We recommend the particular task of computer programming for this purpose--with many reasons behind the selection that should come out in the following discussion.
This eases the experimental problem.
A programmer's effectiveness, relative to other programmers, can probably be measured more easily than would be the case for most other complex-problem solvers.
The programmer's normal work involves interactions with a computer (although heretofore not generally on-line), and this will help researchers use the computer as a tool for learning about the programmer's habits and needs.
"Augmentation means" will be used to name the tools being developed by the augmentation research.
Although no such art exists ready-made for our use, there are many applicable or adaptable tools and techniques to be borrowed from other disciplines.
Initial Augmentation-Research Program.
Not too long ago we would have recommended (and did), in the spirit of taking the long-range and global approach, that right from the beginning of a serious program of this sort there should be established a careful and scientific methodology.
Controlled experiments, with special re search subjects trained and tested in the use of experimental new aug mentation means, careful monitoring, record-keeping, and evaluative procedures, etc.
As for the type of programming to tell them to become good at--tell them, "the kind that you find you have to do in your research."
Regeneration.
On the other hand, if no gains are really obvious after a year or so, then it is time to begin incorporating more science in their approach.
There is orientation to be derived from climbing up quickly for a look that will be of great value.
A few words about the subject matter through which Activity A 1 may progress.
They can work up programs that can search through other programs for answers to questions about them--questions whose answers serve the processes of debugging, extending, or modifying.
Whether A 1 is split, or turned into A 2 and a new group formed for A 3, does not really matter here--we are speaking of separate activities, corresponding to the responsible pursuit of separate goals, that will benefit from close cooperation.
Activity A 2 should be equipped with the best artifacts available to an experimental laboratory.
This provides a direct and continuing pursuit of Goal 3 of Section IV-A .
Activity A 3 will need a subactivity to study its potential users and guide the succession of developments that it pursues.
Activity A 2 could continue to derive long-range guidance for equipment development, perhaps developing laboratory innovations in computers, display systems, storage systems, or communication systems, but at least experimenting with the incorporation of the new artifact innovations of others.
Now, if this conjecture is borne out there would be considerably less value in micro-image information-storage systems than is now generally presumed.
To carry this to something of a final view, relative to the research recommendations, we present Figure 5 , which should be largely self-explanatory by this time.
Activity A 2 is lifting itself by the bootstraps up the scale of intellectual capability, and its products are siphoned to the world via A 3.
Getting acceptance and application of the new techniques to the most critical problems of our society might in fact be the most critical problem of all by then, and Activity A 4 would be one which should be given special help from A 3.
There is another general and long-range picture to present.
A Total Program.
Suggested relationship among the major activities in achieving the stated objective (essentially, of significantly boosting human power in A 4 and U 1).
Subject product of an activity (output solid) can be used as working material (input solid) or as tools and techniques (input dashed).
In other words, CAUG-I represents a basic problem-solving tool kit, plus an auxiliary tool-makers tool kit with which to extend the basic tool kit to match the particular job and particular worker.
In subsequent phases, Activity A 3 could be turning out successive generations (CAUG-II, CAUG-III, etc.)
In the report the following things have been done: (1) An hypothesis has been presented.
(2) A conceptual framework has been constructed.
(3) A "picture" of augmented man has been described.
(4) A research approach has been outlined.
These aspects will be re viewed here briefly: 5a
The elements are dynamically interdependent within an operating system.
This picture is fanciful, but we believe it to be conservative and representative of the sort of rich and significant gains that are there to be pursued.
Three principal conclusions may be drawn concerning the significance and implications of the ideas that have been presented.
Why not consider developing a discipline aimed at understanding and harnessing "neural power?"
In the long run, the power of the human intellect is really much the more important of the two.
Notes-1-1: Kennedy and Putt (see Ref.
Notes-3-2: The reference is to The Measure of Meaning, which is Ref.
Ref-3: Ashby, Ross, "Design for an Intelligence-Amplifier," Automata Studies , edited by C. E. Shannon and J. McCarthy, pp.
Ref-4: Korzybski, A , Science and Sanity , 1st Ed.
Ref-5: Whorf, B. L., Language, Thought, and Reality (MIT & John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York City, N.Y., 1956).
Ref-6: Bush, Vannevar, "As We May Think," The Atlantic Monthly (July 1945).
Ref-7: Newell, A.
Ref-9: Gelernter, H., Hansen, J. R., and Gerberich, C. L., "A Fortran Compiled List-Processing Language," Journal of the Assoc.
for Computing Machinery (April 1960).
Ref-10: Yngve, V. H., "Introduction to COMIT Programming," Technical Report, Research Laboratories of Electronics and Computation Center, MIT (5 November 1961).
4 (April 1960).
Ref-13: Carr, J. W., III, "Recursive Subscripting Compilers and List-Type Memories," Communications of the ACM , Vol.
2, pp.
4-6 (February 1959).
161-165 (March 1962).
Ref-16: Ulam, S. M., A Collection of Mathematical Problems , p. 135 (Interscience Publishers, Inc., New York, N.Y., 1960).
IBM Journal of Research and Development , Vol.
4 (October 1958) 8q
Ref-18: Ramo, Simon, "A New Technique of Education," IRE Trans.
Ref-24: Teager, H. M., "Systems Considerations in Real-Time Computer Usage," paper presented at ONR Symposium on Automated Teaching (12 October 1961).
Ref-26: Vickery, B. C., Classification and Indexing in Science , p. 42 (Academic Press, Inc., New York, 1959).
Ref-27: Osgood, C. E., Suci, G. J., and Tannenbaum, P. H., The Measurement of Meaning (University of Illinois Press, Urbana, Illinois, 1957).
6 NSF-60-25, p. 104 (National Science Foundation, May 1960).
