Augmenting Human Intellect:
A Conceptual Framework
By Douglas C. Engelbart
October 1962
By "augmenting human intellect" we mean increasing the capability of a man to approach a complex problem situation, to gain comprehension to suit his particular needs, and to derive solutions to problems.
This report covers the first phase of a program aimed at developing means to augment the human intellect.
This kind of system approach to human intellectual effectiveness does not find a ready-made conceptual framework such as exists for established disciplines.
In Section IV (Research Recommendations) we present a general strategy for pursuing research toward increasing human intellectual effectiveness.
By this same strategy, we recommend that an initial research effort develop a prototype system of this sort aimed at increasing human effectiveness in the task of computer programming.
To give the reader an initial orientation about what sort of thing this computer-aided working system might be, we include below a short description of a possible system of this sort.
He is designing a building.
Now he enters a reference line with his pointer, and the keyboard.
He often recalls from the "clerk" his working lists of specifications and considerations to refer to them, modify them, or add to them.
In such a future working relationship between human problem-solver and computer 'clerk,' the capability of the computer for executing mathematical processes would be used whenever it was needed.
However, the computer has many other capabilities for manipulating and displaying information that can be of significant benefit to the human in nonmathematical processes of planning, organizing, studying, etc.
The objective of this study is to develop a conceptual framework within which could grow a coordinated research and development program whose goals would be the following: (1) to find the factors that limit the effectiveness of the individual's basic information-handling capabilities in meeting the various needs of society for problem solving in its most general sense; and (2) to develop new techniques, procedures, and systems that will better match these basic capabilities to the needs' problems, and progress of society.
We have placed the following specifications on this framework: 1b1
That it provide perspective for both long-range basic research and research that will yield practical results soon.
That it indicate what this augmentation will actually involve in the way of changes in working environment, in thinking, in skills, and in methods of working.
Second, even if our conceptual framework did provide an accurate and complete basic analysis of the system from which stems a human's intellectual effectiveness, the explicit nature of future improved systems would be highly affected by (expected) changes in our technology or in our understanding of the human being.
Our culture has evolved means for us to organize the little things we can do with our basic capabilities so that we can derive comprehension from truly complex situations, and accomplish the processes of deriving and implementing problem solutions.
The ways in which human capabilities are thus extended are here called augmentation means, and we define four basic classes of them: 2a4
Artifacts --physical objects designed to provide for human comfort, for the manipulation of things or materials, and for the manipulation of symbols.
The system we want to improve can thus be visualized as a trained human being together with his artifacts, language, and methodology.
The explicit new system we contemplate will involve as artifacts computers, and computer-controlled information-storage, information-handling, and information-display devices.
The aspects of the conceptual framework that are discussed here are primarily those relating to the human being's ability to make significant use of such equipment in an integrated system.
It is the augmentation means that serve to break down a large problem in such a way that the human being can walk through it with his little steps, and it is the structure or organization of these little steps or actions that we discuss as process hierarchies .
Every process of thought or action is made up of sub-processes.
In any case, it is not necessary to begin from the bottom in discussing particular process hierarchies.
Instead, he begins from a group of basic sensory-mental-motor process capabilities, and adds to these certain of the process capabilities of his artifacts.
What happens, then, is that each individual develops a certain repertoire of process capabilities from which he selects and adapts those that will compose the processes that he executes.
We find three general categories of process capabilities within a typical individual's repertoire.
We assume that it is our H-LAM/T system (Human using Lauguage, Artifacts, Methodology, in which he is Trained) that has the capability and that performs the process in any instance of use of this repertoire.
Already the system language shows the effect of this process--i.e., a concept and its name.
There is a definite way in which these sub-processes will be organized that represents part of the system methodology.
Each of these sub-processes represents a functional concept that must be a part of the system language if it is to be organized effectively into the human's way of doing things, and the symbolic portrayal of each concept must be such that the human can work with it and remember it.
If the memo is simple, a paragraph or so in length, then the first three processes may well be of the explicit-human type (i.e., it may be planned, developed) and composed within the mind) and the last two of the composite type.
If it is a complex memo, involving a good deal of careful planning and development, then all of the sub-processes might well be of the composite type (e.g., at least including the use of pencil and paper artifacts)' and there might be many different applications of some of the process capabilities within the total process (i.e., successive drafts, revised plans).
However, the very process of organizing and supervising the utilization of these sub-process capabilities is itself a most important sub-process of the memo-writing process.
To illustrate the capability-hierarchy features of our conceptual framework, let us consider an artifact innovation appearing directly within the relatively low-order capability for composing and modifying written text, and see how this can affect a (or, for instance, your) hierarchy of capabilities.
Suppose you had a new writing machine--think of it as a high-speed electric typewriter with some special features.
This writing machine would permit you to use a new process of composing text.
It would be practical for you to accommodate more complexity in the trails of thought you might build in search of the path that suits your needs.
You can integrate your new ideas more easily, and thus harness your creativity more continuously, if you can quickly and flexibly change your working record.
The important thing to appreciate here is that a direct new innovation in one particular capability can have far-reaching effects throughout the rest of your capability hierarchy.
To our objective of deriving orientation about possibilities for actively pursuing an increase in human intellectual effectiveness, it is important to realize that we must be prepared to pursue such new- possibility chains throughout the entire capability hierarchy (calling for a system approach).
Individuals who operate effectively in our culture have already been considerably "augmented."
Basic human capabilities for sensing stimuli, performing numerous mental operations, and for communicating with the outside world, are put to work in our society within a system--an H-LAM/T system--the individual augmented by the language, artifacts, and methodology in which he is trained.
Increasing the effectiveness of the individual's use of his basic capabilities is a problem in redesigning the changeable parts of a system.
The system is actively engaged in the continuous processes (among others) of developing comprehension within the individual and of solving problems; both processes are subject to human motivation, purpose, and will.
Essentially any of the processes utilized by a representative human today--the processes that he thinks of when he looks ahead to his day's work--are composite processes of the sort that involve external composing and manipulating of symbols (text, sketches, diagrams, lists, etc.).
When one looks at a computer system that is doing a very complex job, he sees on the surface a machine that can execute some extremely sophisticated processes.
Actually, this sophisticated capability results from a very clever organizational hierarchy so that pursuit of the source of intelligence within this system would take one down through layers of functional and physical organization that become successively more primitive.
The second level down would organize lesser functions into the processes represented by first-level statements.
If there is any one thing upon which this 'intelligence depends' it would seem to be organization .
In amplifying our intelligence, we are applying the principle of synergistic structuring that was followed by natural evolution in developing the basic human capabilities.
What we have done in the development of our augmentation means is to construct a superstructure that is a synthetic extension of the natural structure upon which it is built.
It is upon their capabilities that the ultimate capability of the system will depend.
However, the direct concern of our present study lies within the system, with the internal processes that are and can be significantly involved in the effectiveness of the system in developing the human's comprehension and pursuing the human's goals.
Before we pursue further direct discussion of the H-LAM/T system, let us examine some background material.
(1) Concept Manipulation --Humans rose above the lower forms of life by evolving the biological capability for developing abstractions and concepts.
(2) Symbol Manipulation --Humans made another great step forward when they learned to represent particular concepts in their minds with specific symbols.
(We are not concerned here with the value derived from human cooperation made possible by speech and writing, both forms of external symbol manipulation.
It is principally this kind of means for external symbol manipulation that has been associated with the evolution of the individual's present way of doing his concept manipulation (thinking).
It seems very likely that a more useful language form can be devised.
But there seems to be another factor to consider in the evolution of language and human reasoning ability.
We offer the following hypothesis, which is related to the Whorfian hypothesis: Both the language used by a culture, and the capability for effective intellectual activity are directly affected during their evolution by the means by which individuals control the external manipulation of symbols.
If the means evolved for an individual's external manipulation of his thinking-aid symbols indeed directly affect the way in which he thinks, then the original Whorfian hypothesis would offer an added effect.
There would then be two ways for the manner in which our external symbol manipulation was done to affect our thinking.
One way of viewing the H-LAM/T system changes that we contemplate--specifically, integrating the capabilities of a digital computer into the intellectual activity of individual humans--is that we are introducing new and extremely advanced means for externally manipulating symbols.
We then want to determine the useful modifications in the language and in the way of thinking that could result.
In search of some simple ways to determine what the Neo-Whorfian hypothesis might imply, we could imagine some relatively straightforward means of increasing our external symbol-manipulation capability and try to picture the consequent changes that could evolve in our language and methods of thinking.
We thus performed the following experiment.
The significance to our study of the discussion in this section lies in the perspective it gives to the ways in which human intellectual effectiveness can be affected by the particular means used by individuals for their external symbol manipulation.
It seems reasonable to consider the development of automated external symbol manipulation means as a next stage in the evolution of our intellectual power.
The concept of our H-LAM/T system possessing a repertoire of capabilities that is structured in the form of a hierarchy is most useful in our study.
We shall use it in the following to tie together a number of considerations and concepts.
Basic Capabilities 2c5b "Materials" in this context are those capabilities in the human and in the artifact domains from which all other capabilities in the repertoire hierarchy must be constructed.
Each such basic capability represents a type of functional component with which the system can be built, and a thorough job of redesigning the system calls for making an inventory of the basic capabilities available.
The first class (those in use) can be found in a methodical manner by analyzing present capability hierarchies.
The capability for performing a certain finger action, for example, may not be basic in our sense of the word.
But at the level of the capability hierarchy where we wish to work, it seems useful to us to distinguish several different types of structuring--even though each type is fundamentally a structuring of the basic physical processes.
We use the terms "mental structuring", "concept structuring", "symbol structuring", "process structuring," and "physical structuring."
And further, our assumption is that when the human in our H/LAM system makes the key decision or action that leads to the solution of a complex problem, it will stem from the state of his mental structure at that time.
In this view then, the basic purpose of the system's activity on that problem up to that point has been to develop his mental structure to the state from which the mental mechanisms could derive the key action.
What's more, our entire conceptual framework represents the first pass at a "theoretical model with which to organize our thinking and action."
3) Concept Structuring 2c5c3 Within our framework we have developed the working assumption that the manner in which we seem to be able to provide experiences that favor the development of our mental structures is based upon concepts as a "medium of exchange."
For present purposes, we can view a concept structure as something which we might try to develop on paper for ourselves or work with by conscious thought processes, or as something which we try to communicate to one another in serious discussion.
But it is also something that can be directly designed or modified, and a basic hypothesis of our study is that better concept structures can be developed-- structures that when mapped into a human's mental structure will significantly improve his capability to comprehend and to find solutions within his complex-problem situations.
A natural language provides its user with a readymade structure of concepts that establishes a basic mental structure, and that allows relatively flexible, general-purpose concept structuring.
Our concept of language as one of the basic means for augmenting the human intellect embraces all of the concept structuring which the human may make use of.
4) Symbol Structuring 2c5c4 The other important part of our "language" is the way in which concepts are represented--the symbols and symbol structures .
But it is not only the form of a symbol structure that is important.
This sort of "view generation" becomes quite feasible with a computer-controlled display system, and represents a very significant capability to build upon.
What the computer actually stores need be none of our concern, assuming that it can portray symbol structures to us that are consistent with the form in which we think our information is structured.
A given concept structure can be represented with a symbol structure that is completely compatible with the computer's internal way of handling symbols, with all sorts of characteristics and relationships given explicit identifications that the user may never directly see.
The computer can transform back and forth between the two-dimensional portrayal on the screen, of some limited view of the total structure, and the aspect of the n-dimensional internal image that represents this "view".
But let the human specify to the instrument his particular conceptual need of the moment, relative to this internal image.
With the set of standard translation rules appropriate to the situation, it portrays to the human via its display a symbol structure designed for his quick and accurate perception and comprehension of the conceptual matter pertinent to this internally composed substructure.
These new ways of working are basically available with today's technology--we have but to free ourselves from some of our limiting views and begin experimenting with compatible sets of structure forms and processes for human concepts, human symbols, and machine symbols.
5) Process Structuring 2c5c5 Essentially everything that goes on within the H-LAM/T system and that is of direct interest here involves the manipulation of concept and symbol structures in service to the mental structure.
Therefore, the processes within the H-LAM/T system that we are most interested in developing are those that provide for the manipulation of all three types of structure.
As we are currently using it, the term includes the organization, study, modification, and execution of processes and process structures.
The individual processes (or actions) of my hands and fingers have to be cooperatively organized if the typewriter is to do my bidding.
My successive actions throughout my working day are meant to cooperate toward a certain over-all professional goal.
Many of the process structures are applied to the task of organizing, executing, supervising, and evaluating other process structures.
Many of them are applied to the formation and manipulation of symbol structures (the purpose of which will often be to support the conceptual labor involved in process structuring).
We have seen how the capability for mental structuring is finally dependent, down the chain, upon the process structuring (human, artifact, composite) that enables symbol-structure manipulation.
All of this means that a significant improvement in symbol-structure manipulation through better process structuring (initially perhaps through much better artifacts) should enable us to develop improvements in concept and mental-structure manipulations that can in turn enable us to organize and execute symbol-manipulation processes of increased power.
We can confidently expect the development of much more powerful concepts pertaining to the manner in which symbol structures can be manipulated and portrayed, and correspondingly more complex manipulation processes that in the first pass would have been beyond the human's power to organize and execute without the better symbol, concept, and mental structuring which his augmented system provided him.
These new concepts and processes, beyond our present capabilities to use and thus never developed, will provide a tremendous increased-capability payoff in the future development of our augmentation means.
c. Roles and Levels 2c5d In the repertoire hierarchy of capabilities possessed by the H-LAM/T system, the human contributes many types of capability that represent a wide variety of roles.
Consider a given capability (Capability 1) at some level in the repertoire hierarchy.
In the executive class of capabilities we find those used for comprehending, planning, and executing the process represented by Capability 1.
At a little higher level of capability, more of the conscious conceptual and executive capabilities become involved.
In such a case, one might make a list of steps and check each item off as it is executed.
Imagining a process as complex as the last example brings us to the realization that at any particular moment the H-LAM/T system may be in the middle of executing a great number of processes.
A well-designed H-LAM/T system would provide explicit and effective concepts, terms, equipment, and methods for all these roles, and for their dynamic coordination.
d. Model of Executive Superstructure 2c5e It is the repertoire hierarchy of process capabilities upon which the ultimate capability of the H-LAM/T system rests.
In the situation where talent is limited, we find a close parallel to our H-LAM/T system in its pursuit of comprehension and problem solutions.
We could expect significant gains from automating the H- LAM/T system if a computer could do nothing more than increase the effectiveness of the executive processes.
But there is every reason to believe that the possibilities for much-improved symbol and process structuring that would stem from this automation will directly provide improvements in both the executive and direct-contributive processes in the system.
When the system encounters a complex situation in which comprehension and problem solutions are being pursued, the direct-contributive roles require the development of symbol structures that portray the concepts involved within the situation.
But executive roles in a complex problem situation also require conceptual activity--e.g., comprehension, selection, supervision--that can benefit from well-designed symbol structures and fast, flexible means for manipulating and displaying them.
For complex processes, the executive problem posed to the human (of gaining the necessary comprehension and making a good plan) may be tougher than the problem he faced in the role of direct-contributive worker.
The means available to humans today for developing and manipulating these symbol structures are both laborious and inflexible.
We find that the humans in our H-LAM/T systems are essential working continuously within a symbol structure of some sort, shifting their attention from one structure to another as they guide and execute the processes that ultimately provide them with the comprehension and the problem solutions that they seek.
This view increases our respect for the essential importance of the basic capability of composing and modifying efficient symbol structures.
Such a capability depends heavily upon the particular concepts that are isolated and manipulated as entities, upon the symbology used to represent them, upon the artifacts that help to manipulate and display the symbols, and upon the methodology for developing and using symbol structures.
In other words, this capability depends heavily upon proper language, artifacts, and methodology, our basic augmentation means.
The compounding effect of fundamental human cognitive powers suggests further that systems designed for maximum effectiveness would require that these powers be developed as fully as possible--by training, special mental tricks, improved language, new methodology.
In the automated system that we contemplate, the human should be able to draw on explicit-artifact process capability at many levels in the repertoire hierarchy; today, artifacts are involved explicitly in only the lower-order capabilities.
In the future systems, for instance, it should be possible to have computer processes provide direct and significant help in his processes at many levels.
A great deal of richness in the future possibilities for automated H-LAM/T systems is implied here--considerably more than many people realize who would picture the computer as just helping them do the things they do now.
Anything that might have so general an effect upon our mental actions as is implied here, is certainly a candidate for ultimate consideration in the continuing development of our intellectual effectiveness.
It may be that the first stages of research on augmenting the human intellect will have to proceed without being able to do anything about this problem except accommodate to it as well as possible.
This may be one of the very significant problems whose solution awaits our development of increased intellectual effectiveness.
We predict that what actually develops in the new augmentation means will be consistent with our conceptual framework, but that the particulars will be full of surprises.
This organization, as we have shown in Section II , can be viewed as the five different types of structuring which we outlined, where much of the structuring that goes on in the human's total problem solving activity is for the purpose of building a mental structure which in a way "puts the human up where he can see what is going on and can point the direction to move next."
Then " ..So much for the manipulation of ideas and their insertion into the record.
A memex is a device in which an individual stores all his books, records, and communications, and which is mechanized so that it may be consulted with exceeding speed and flexibility.
This is the essential feature of the memex.
The process of tying two items together is the important thing.
"When the user is building a trail, he names it, inserts the name in his code book, and taps it out on his keyboard.
Moreover, when numerous items have been thus joined together to form a trail, they can be reviewed in turn, rapidly or slowly, by deflecting a lever like that used for turning the pages of a book.
It is exactly as though the physical items had been gathered together to form a new book.
Thus he goes, building a trail of many items.
Thus he builds a trail of his interest through the maze of materials available to him.
In fact he has a trail on it.
Tapping a few keys projects the head of the trail.
A lever runs through it at will, stopping at interesting items, going off on side excursions.
It is an interesting trail, pertinent to the discussion.
The associative trails whose establishment and use within the files he describes at some length provide a beautiful example of a new capsbility in symbol structuring that derives from new artifact-process capability, and that provides new ways to develop and portray concept structures.
Any file is a symbol structure whose purpose is to represent a variety of concepts and concept structures in a way that makes them maximally available and useful to the needs of the human's mental-structure development -- within the limits imposed by the capability of the artifacts and human for jointly executing processes of symbol-structure manipulation.
This type of change represents a very significant part of the potential value in pursuing research directly on the means for making individuals intellectually more effective.
A number of useful new structuring processes can be made available to an individual through development and use of relatively simple equipment that is mostly electromechanical in nature and relatively cheap.
We can begin developing examples of this by describing the hand operated, edge-notched card system that I developed and used over the past eight years.
Not only do my own thoughts produce results in this fashion, but when I digest the writings of another person, I find generally anyway that I have extracted from his structure and integrated into my own a specific selection of facts, considerations, ideas, etc.
I can leave notes with suggestions or questions for myself that will drop out at an appropriate later time.
Comments on the System 3a7c First, let me relate what has been described to the special terms brought out in previous sections.
The writing contained on each notecard is a small-sized symbol structure, representing or portraying to me a small structure of concepts.
This restructuring is effected by composite processes involving me, a master code card, a sorting needle, and a work surface.
I can add to the symbol structure by executing other composite processes which involve me, writing instruments (pen, pencil, or type writer), a master code card, and a card notcher.
As it is, and as it probably always will be no matter how we develop or train our mental capabilities, I want to work in problem areas where the number and interrelationship complexity of the individual factors involved are too much for me to hold and manipulate within my mind.
c. Associative-Linking Possibilities 3a7d But let us go further with discussing specific examples of means for augmenting our intellects.
Suppose that one wants to link Card B to Card A, to make a trail from A to B.
A very quick and simple human process thus initiates the automatic extraction of the next item on the associative trail.
As more thoughts developed, I found that the latter group also divided into ideas representing possible content and those representing possible organization.
I separated the cards into three corresponding groups (which I shall call Specification, Organization, and Content), and began to organize each of them.
I found rather quickly that the job of extracting, re arranging, editing, and copying new statements into the cards which were to represent the current set of product statements in each grouping was rather tedious.
Statements very often had implicit linkages to other statements in the same group, and it would have been very useful to keep track of these associations.
Being able to fish out the other considerations linked to that statement would have helped considerably.
But it was a very provocative experience, considering the possibilities that I sensed for the flexible and powerful ways in which I could apply myself to so universal a design task if I but had the necessary means with which to manipulate symbol structures.
Such an approach would present useful and interesting research problems, and could very likely produce practical and significant results (language, artifacts, methodology) for improving the effective ness of professional problem solvers.
The next set of descriptive examples will involve the use of electronic computers, and their greatly increased flexibility and processing potential will be evident.
For those already familiar with the technology, the following discussion can perhaps help them gain more understanding of our concepts of process and symbol structuring.
It takes a repertoire of surprisingly few such primitive processes to enable the construction of any symbol-manipulation process that can be explicitly described in any language.
To have the computer perform a non-trivial task or process, a structure of the primitive processes is organized (a computer program) and stored within the computer as a corresponding symbol structure.
The computer successively examines the symbol substructure representing each primitive process in the program and executes that process--which usually alters the total internal symbol structure of the machine in some way.
Among the more interesting computer-process structures that have evolved are those that can automatically develop a structure of primitive computer processes to accomplish symbol manipulation tasks that are specified on a relatively high level of abstraction.
Their standard manner for organizing the data which the computer was to operate upon is thus what they term "list structuring."
They also developed special languages to descrlbe different basic processes involved in list-structure manipulation.
( 7 ) In these languages, both the data to be worked upon and the symbols which designate the processes to be executed upon that data are developed in list-structure form.
The languages and techniques used in both types of application promise to be of considerable value to the development of radical new augmentation systems for human problem solvers, and we shall deal later with them in more detail.
Computers have various means for storing symbols so that they are accessible to it for manipulation.
Cheaper, larger-capacity backup storage is usually provided by devices to which access takes considerably longer (in the computer's time reference).
This is short in the human's time scale, but a reasonably fast computer could execute about 3,000 of its primitive processes during that time.
But these two types of devices do not allow fast and flexible rearrangement of the symbols being displayed, which proves to be an important drawback in our current view of future possibilities for augmentation.
Such equipment may play an important role in the individual-augmentation systems of the future (but our feeling is that a very powerful augmentation system can be developed without them).
An important type of development for our consideration of providing individual humans with close-coupled computer services is what is known as time sharing.
Good ( 17 ) includes some conjecture about possibilities of intellectual aid to the human by close cooperation with a computer in a rather general way, and also presents a few interesting thoughts about a network model for structuring the conceptual kernels of information to facilitate a sort of self-organizing retrieval system.
In the second category, there have been a few papers published recently describing actual work that bears directly upon our topic.
Let us consider some specific possibilities for redesigning the augmentation means for an intellectually oriented, problem-solving human.
We choose to present those developments of language and methodology that can capitalize upon the symbol-manipulating and portraying capabilities of computer-based equipment.
Although our generalizations (about augmentation means, capability hierarchies, and mental-, concept-, symbol-, process-, and physical structuring) might retain their validity in the future--for instance, our generalized prediction that new developments in concept, symbol, and process structuring will prove to be tremendously important--the specific concepts, symbol structures, and processes that evolve will most likely differ from what we know and use now.
He suggests that you sit and watch him for a while as he pursues some typical work, after which he will do some explaining.
It will just be a matter of "having the computer do some of his symbol-manipulating processes for him so that he can use more powerful concepts and concept-manipulation techniques," as you have so often been told.
Some of the time Joe is using both hands on the keys, obviously feeding information into the computer at a great rate.
It is in this type of working mode that the images on the display frames changed most dynamically.
Then you realized that you couldn't make any sense at all out of the specific things he was doing, nor of the major part of what you saw on the displays.
You could recognize many words, but there were a good number that were obviously special abbreviations of some sort.
And yet our systems wouldn't be anywhere near as powerful without them, and a person's comprehension of the system would be rather shallow if he didn't have some understanding of these basic capabilities and of the hierarchical structure built up from them to provide the highest-level capabilities."
You listened and watched as Joe showed you some of the different ways in which the composition of straightforward text was made easier for him in this system.
But there were other ways in which help was derived for this composition task.
Joe showed you another way in which this abbreviation feature might work.
He "arranged" for the computer to print the abbreviation on the display, just the way he typed it in.
It seems that, for instance, the 150 most commonly used words in a natural language made up about half of any normal text in that language.
With this statement, Joe proceeded to show you what he meant.
One of the sections of text was about a third longer than the other--but two quick strokes with Joe's left hand caused the computer to adjust the display automatically.
Yes, you were beginning to get a feel for what the expression "flexible new methods for manipulating symbol structures" might really imply, at least on this basic-capability level.
"If we want to go on to a higher-level capability to give you a feeling for how our rebuilt capability hierarchy works, it will speed us along to look at how we might organize these more primitive capabilities which I have demonstrated into some new and better ways to set up what we can call an 'argument.'
This refers loosely to any set of statements (we'll call them 'product statements') that represents the product of a period of work toward a given objective.
Well, take the simple case where an argument leads to a single product statement.
You go through some reasoning process--usually involving statements--and come up with a statement specifying that next step.
We usually string Statement B after Statement A, with Statements C, D, E, F, and so on following in that order--this is a serial structuring of our symbols.
The old paper and pencil methods of manipulating symbols just weren't very adaptable to making and using symbol structures to match the ways we make and use conceptual structures.
So let's see how we can accommodate the human's way of developing his comprehension and his final problem solution.
Somehow we implicitly view most all of our methods as just sort of 'the way things are done, that's all.'
But the good side of your character shows through, and you realize that everything so far has been about little things--this is probably an important point.
Your ideas begin to take shape, and you can continually re-work the existing set of statements to keep representing the state of your "concept structure."
You reflected that this flexible cut-and-try process really did appear to match the way you seemed to develop your thoughts.
But the same computer here that gives us these freedoms with so trivial an application of its power, can just as easily give us other simple capabilities which we can apply to the development and use of different types of structure from what we used to use.
"When you look at a given statement in the middle of your argument structure, there are a number of things you want to know.
You look at a statement and you want to understand its meaning.
You are used to seeing a statement portrayed in just the manner you might hear it--as a serial succession of words.
Joe picked out one of your sentences, and pushed the rest of the text a few lines up and down from it to isolate it.
He then showed you how he could make a few strokes on the keyset to designate the type of link he wanted established, and pick the two symbol structures that were to be linked by means of the light pen.
He went to work for a moment, rapidly setting up links within your sentence.
Then he showed you how you could get some help in looking at a statement and understanding it.
And he showed you also how you could link secondary phrases (or sentences) to parts of the statement for more detailed description.
"It proves to be terrifically useful to be able to work easily with statements that represent more sophisticated and complex concepts.
"When you look at a statement and ask, 'How come?
But some of these previous statements are much more significant than others to this search for understanding.
Let us use what we call 'antecedent links' to point to these, and I'll give you a basic idea of how we structure an argument so that we can quickly track down the essential basis upon which a given statement rests."
You helped him pick out the primary antecedents of the statement you had been studying, and he established links to them.
The subject statement went to the bottom of the frame, and the antecedent statements were neatly listed above it.
When we had established the antecedent links for all the statements in the argument, the question 'So what?'
that you might ask when looking at a given statement would be answered by looking for the statements for which the given statement was an antecedent.
Once the antecedent-consequent links have been established, the computer can automatically construct such a display for us."
So, Joe spent a few minutes (with your help) establishing a reasonable set of links among the statements you had originally listed.
"Each node or dot represents one of the statements of your argument, and the lines are antecedent-consequent links.
Joe demonstrated some ways in which you could make use of the diagram to study the argument structure.
Call the antecedents forth on the second screen, and select one of special interest--deleting the others.
For one thing, I can tell the computer to number the statements in the order in which you originally had them listed, and have the labelling done automatically."
The statements that were on the second screen now each had its respective serial number sitting next to it in the left margin.
There may be many levels of substructuring between the level of individual symbols and that represented by the entire collection.
The associative trails that Bush suggested represent a primitive example of this.
"I found, when I learned to work with the structures and manipulation processes such as we have outlined, that I got rather impatient if I had to go back to dealing with the serial-statement structuring in books and journals, or other ordinary means of communicating with other workers.
It is rather like having to project three-dimensional images onto two-dimensional frames and to work with them there instead of in their natural form.
I guess that's a natural feeling, though.
Some of these techniques are quite closely related to those used in automated-instruction programming--perhaps you know about 'teaching machines?'
The references are available for study in original serial form on our screens, but any structuring and tagging done by a previous reader, or ourselves, can also be utilized.
"A number of us here are using the augmented systems for our project research, and we find that after a few passes through a reference, we very rarely go back to it in its original form.
He started to speak, thought differently of it, and turned to flash something on a screen.
I've developed a sequence for presenting the different basic features of our augmentation system that seems to work pretty well, and I just wanted to be sure I was still following it reasonably closely."
"A process is something that is designed, built, and used--as is any tool.
For one thing, the laying out of objectives and a method of approach for a problem represent a form of process design and building, to our way of looking at it.
"It won't take too much time to give you a feel for the helpful methods we have for working on computer-process structures -- or programs -- because there is quite a bit of similarity in concept to what you have seen in the symbol-structuring techniques.
But, what he finally had on the display frame was quite different from the argument statements you had seen.
to point out the usefulness of some of our structuring methods.
Here, in process structuring, corresponding questions about a statement might be: 'What does it say to do?'
'What effect will that have?'
Let's take a quick look at some of the ways you can get help in answering them.
For the second question, relative to what effect the specified action will have, some of these symbols to the right give you a quick story about the very detailed and immediate effect on the state of the symbol structure which this process structure is manipulating.
Other symbols here provide keys which a light-pen selection can activate to bring to you displays of that symbol structure, usually a choice of several relevant views at different levels of the structure.
Then I can use the keyset to ask for the preceding statement, if I'm a little puzzled about the detailed manipulation--or, I can request a specific higher-level view of the process structure by light-pen selection on one of these remaining symbols here.
"This is the next level up in the process structure.
"Most of this portrayal technique actually represents special structuring of what we previously defined in a loose way as arguments.
The human who wants to approach an established process structure in order to modify it, needs to gain comprehension of the relevant features both of the functioning and of the design of the structure.
And if he is building a new process structure or changing an existing one, he needs to structure the argument or reasoning behind the design.
We have developed a number of special symbol-structuring techniques that allow us to match especially well to the concepts involved in designing processes.
"But there is a very significant feature involved in this particular type of process structuring that I should tell you about.
It is based upon the fact that the process-description language for the computer is formal and precise.
"In our studying and designing process structures, we have found many ways to capitalize upon this more sophisticated question-answering capability now possessed by the computer.
We are getting terrific help in this type of instance, since we can now ask the computer direct questions about types of capability and limitation in this structure.
The augmented man is engaged more often in structuring what we call composite processes than he is in structuring computer processes.
For instance, planning a research project, or a day's work, are examples of structuring composite processes.
The structuring here differs from that of a computer process mainly in the sophistication of the sub-processes which can be specified for the human to do.
This means that there few composite-process structures about which the computer can answer very useful questions for us.
We mentioned above what the characteristic structural difference was between computer processes and composite processes.
For instance, we provide him as much help as possible in making a plan of action.
But we also have to allow him to change his mind at almost any point, and to want to modify his plans.
"Here's a simple example of this sort of help for the human.
This was quite helpful to us for evaluating our ways of doing things.
"Our way of structuring the statement of our objectives, the arguments which lead to the design of our plans, and the working statements of our plans, has been influenced by this review process.
We found special types of tags and descriptive codes which we could append to these respective planning structures as we developed them which later facilitated our man-computer cooperative review of them.
Also, our methods of developing these structures have evolved to facilitate their later modification.
For instance, every basic consideration upon which a given planning statement is based is linked to that statement as a matter of standard argument structuring.
But we have taken to linking special tagging codes into these argument structures involving our planning, to identify for the computer some of the different types of dependency relationships in the antecedent linkages.
Later, if we consider changing the plan, these special tags often enable us to make use of some special computer processes that automatically isolate the considerations relevant to a particular type of change we have in mind.
It turns out that this plan is closely coupled in its design argument to the general plan for reviewing process structures--and symbol-structures, too, for that matter.
"This I could do relatively rapidly, by your standards, by snooping down the antecedent trails, looking for statements relevant to this timing question.
There is, in fact, a semi-automatic processes available to me for speeding just such searches.
"But let's try to back away from details for a bit, now, and see if we can get a feeling for the significance of the things we've been talking about.
This would give you more freedom and more interesting possibilities in the way you worked and designed.
"A lot of questions you might ask he couldn't answer directly, but in such a case he could often lead you quickly to some relevant pages in his books.
Then the processes which were too much for him would be done by the two of you together.
Your effectiveness in this domain of activity would be considerably increased.
"So let's turn back to the working domain which we are considering here.
We get direct help on many levels of activity in our system, you see.
"Our specialized processes represent a beautiful collection of special tools.
"Let me tell you of an interesting feature stemming from my using such improved Process-structuring techniques.
An effective job of breaking down a complex problem into humanly manageable steps--and this is essentially what we seek in our process structuring--will provide the human with something to do at every turn.
"Anyway, with the quick flexibility available to me for structuring arguments, and semi-automatic application of special tagging and linking rules, I find it really quite easy to construct, use, or modify sophisticated process structuring.
We have experimented with having several people work together from working stations that can provide inter-communication via their computer or computers.
That is, each person is equipped as I am here, with free access to the common working structures.
They can all work on the same symbol structure, wherever they might wish.
Most points of contention are resolved quite naturally, over a period of time, as the developing structure of argument bears out one, or the other, or neither stand.
Any idea of the moment by any member can easily be linked to where it can do some good.
You find yourself 'playing over your head' almost all of the time.
In studying the other's structuring then, either of them can have his own definitions automatically substituted for the other's special terms.
The ability to structure arguments organized in English-language statements, and to make use of the linking and tagging capabilities at all levels of the structure, can be seen to lead to many interesting and promising new capabilities for organizing your thoughts and actions.
I think you could picture learning these tricks and using them in your own work.
"What these people became capable of was somewhat less than the range of capabilities that we have discussed so far--but they would find it very natural to develop further techniques on their own, and new teaching programs could be provided them so that they could continue learning the improved techniques turned out by a research group such as ours here.
"For instance, we initially felt that defining categories and relationships, and making a plan for action, were things to be done as quickly as possible so that we could get on with the work.
But, as our means developed for dealing with definitions and plans more precisely, easily, and flexibly, we began to realize that they in reality might be the most significant part of that work.
It is heavily dependent upon the very care in building structures that it so nicely facilitates, and also upon several other developments.
These offered useful possibilities for establishing quite precisely what meaning a concept has to an individual, relative to his general conceptual framework, and for representing this meaning in a specific way that was amenable to computer manipulation.
He has developed some useful techniques for us to use in connection with this, and other problems.
Let's say that I have developed its description in what you and I have been calling an argument structure.
I want to give it a name--a short and meaningful one--and I want a good definition.
In fact, I want a definition that the computer can later work with.
A statement appeared in the lower half of the second frame.
Joe studied this, referred to the statements above, flipped through several levels of network portrayals, through a few statements representing a couple of low-level nodes, reflected a moment, and then pointed his light pen at a point on the graduated line, part way between the adjectives, and pressed its button.
"Actually, right now I'm demonstrating a cooperative process execution technique.
It also is doing a lot of work on the symbol structure that represents my description.
"This first line gives me two suggested names for this category or concept.
"The fourth line you recognize as a statement form, perhaps.
This is the definition, as developed by the computer.
"This special language, in which I said the definition was stated, is a recent development.
If it can get hold of and manipulate important aspects of the meaning that is contained in our structures, it can develop answers to some questions for which there existed only conceptually implicit data.
With practice and good strategy, asking questions like this proves to be a tremendously effective way to gain comprehension about a structure.
We even have special processes and symbol-structuring methods to help organize the questioning and the answers.
Some of the answers are a bit costly, however--in computer time and charges--and we have to watch the way we ask questions.
Some of our researchers are studying the language and structuring techniques relative to this problem, and they think they see ways to change them to make question answering generally more efficient.
But this sort of thing will likely always have its cost problems, as far as we can see now."
The Clerk can also point out some of the weaknesses in the statement, as well as some of the effects of the statement upon the rest of the structure.
They find that they need to give less and less human concern for the details of structure building--in-fact, the roles have reversed a little.
You have been through an experience that was designed to give you a feel for the sort of future developments that (to us) are predictable from our conceptual framework.
Assuming that we have communicated our conceptual framework in some reasonable form, we proceed below to discuss the question of what to do about it.
The report has put forth the hypothesis that the intellectual effectiveness of a human being is dependent upon factors which are subject to direct redesign in pursuit of an increase in that effectiveness.
The question of limiting these factors is considered later in the section.
At this point no time will be taken to develop elaborate improvements in the art of time sharing, to provide real-time service to many users.
The computer can turn away from off-line users whenever the on-line worker needs attention of any sort.
The experimental work of deriving, testing, and integrating innovations into a growing system of augmentation means must have a specific type of human task to try to develop more effectiveness for, to give unifying focus to the research.
We recommend the particular task of computer programming for this purpose--with many reasons behind the selection that should come out in the following discussion.
Some of the more direct reasons are these: 4c1
Successful achievements in evolving new augmentation means which significantly improve a programmer's capability will not only serve to prove the hypothesis, but will lead directly to possible practical application of augmentation systems to a real-world problem domain that can use help.
Computer programmers are a natural group to be the first in the "real world" to incorporate the type of augmentation means we are considering.
Successful achievements can be utilized within the augmentation-research program itself, to improve the effectiveness of the computer programming activity involved in studying and developing augmentation systems.
The capability of designing, implementing, and modifying computer programs will be very important to the rate of research progress.
Workers in an augmentation-research laboratory are the most natural people in the world to be the very first users of the augmentation means they develop, and we think that they represent an extremely important group of people to make more effective at their work.
This positive-feedback (or regenerative) possibility derives from the facts that: (1) our researchers are developing means to increase the effectiveness of humans dealing with complex intellectual problems, and (2) our researchers are dealing with complex intellectual problems.
This close similarity between tools being developed and the tools being used to do the developing, calls for some care in our terminology if we want to avoid confusion in our reasoning about their relationship.
"Augmentation means" will be used to name the tools being developed by the augmentation research.
"Tools and techniques" will be used to name the tools being used to do that research, and are likely here to include special additions to language, artifact, and methodology that particularly improve the special capabilities exercised in doing the research.
An integrated set of tools and techniques will represent an art of doing augmentation research.
These disciplines also offer initial subject matter for the research.
Because this kind of diagramming can help more later on, we represent in Figure 3 the situation of the beginning research drawing upon existing disciplines for subject matter and tools and techniques.
Goal 1 has been stated as that of verifying the basic hypothesis that concerted augmentation research can increase the intellectual effectiveness of human problem solvers.
Before we discuss the possible subject matter through which this research might work, let us treat the matter of its tools and techniques.
As for the type of programming to tell them to become good at--tell them, "the kind that you find you have to do in your research."
On the other hand, if no gains are really obvious after a year or so, then it is time to begin incorporating more science in their approach.
By then there will be a good deal of basic orientation as to the nature of the problem to which "science" is to be applied.
As progress begins to be made toward Goal l,the diagram of Figure 3 will become modified by feeding the subject-matter output (augmentation means for computer programmers) back into the input as new tools and techniques to be used by the researchers.
A few words about the subject matter through which Activity A 1 may progress.
To Activity A 2 assign the job of developing augmentation means to be used specifically as tools and techniques by the researchers of both A 2 and A 3.
This establishes a continuing pursuit for Objective 2 of Section IY-A.
A 2 will now set up a sub-activity that studies the problems of all the workers in A 2 and A 3 and isolates a succession of capabilities for which the research of A 2 will develop means to augment.
Activity A 2 should be equipped with the best artifacts available to an experimental laboratory.
To Activity A 3 assign the job of developing augmentation systems that can be practically adopted into real-world problem situations.
This provides a direct and continuing pursuit of Goal 3 of Section IV-A .
It is to be assumed that the first real-world system that A 3 will design will be for computer programmers.
Activity A 2 in its continued pursuit of increased effectiveness among workers in idealized environment, will be the source for basic subject matter in the developments of A 3, as well as for its tools and techniques.
We point out there that within the computer there might be built and manipulated symbol structures that represent better images of the concept structures of interest to the human than would any symbol structure with which the human could work directly.
In other words, we now conjecture that future reference information will be much more valuable if stored in computer-sensible form.
There is another general and long-range picture to present.
4g8a It would be derived from what was assessed to be the basic set of capabilities needed by both a general-problem-solvlng human and an augmentation researcher.
Give CAUG-I to a real-world problem solver in almost any discipline, and he has the basic capabilities for structuring his arguments and plans, organizing special files, etc., that almost anyone could expect to need.
In addition to these direct-application on capabilities, however, are provided those capabilities necessary for analyzing problem tasks, developing and evaluating new process capabilities, etc., as would be required for him to extend the CAUG-I system to match to the special features of his problem area and the way he likes to work.
each incorporating features that match an ever-more-powerful capability hierarchy in an ever-more-efficient manner to the basic capabilities of the human.
In the report the following things have been done: (1) An hypothesis has been presented.
(3) A "picture" of augmented man has been described.
(4) A research approach has been outlined.
An hypothesis has been stated that the intellectual effectiveness of a human can be significantly improved by an engineering-like approach toward redesigning changeable components of a system.
The principal elements are the language artifacts, and methodology that a human has learned to use.
The structure of the system seems to be hierarchical, and to be best considered as a hierarchy of process capabilities whose primitive components are the basic human capabilities and the functional capabilities of the artifacts--which are organized successively into ever-more-sophisticated capabilities.
The capabilities of prime interest are those associated with manipulating symbols and concepts in support of organizing and executing processes from which are ultimately derived human comprehension and problem solutions.
The automation of the symbol manipulation associated with the minute-by-minute mental processes seems to offer a logical next step in the evolution of our intellectual capability.
A picture of the implications and promise of this framework has been described, based upon direct human communication with a computer.
Here the many ways in which the computer could be of service, at successive levels of augmented capability, have been brought out.
This approach is designed to treat the redesign of a capability hierarchy by reworking from the bottom up, and yet to make the research on augmentation means progress as fast as possible by deriving practically usable augmentation systems for real-world problem solvers at a maximum rate.
The real-world applications would be pursued by designing a succession of systems for specialists, whose progression corresponds to the increasing generality of the capabilities for which coordinated augmentation means have been evolved.
Consideration is given in this rather global approach to providing potential users in different domains of intellectual activity with the basic general-purpose augmentation system from which they themselves can construct the special featuresof a system to match their job, and their ways of working--or it could be used on the other hand by researchers who want to pursue the development of sepcial augmentation systems for special fields.
First any possibility for improving the effective utilization of the intellectual power of society's problem solvers warrants the most serious consideration.
In the long run, the power of the human intellect is really much the more important of the two.
1 in the list at the end of the report) bring out the importance of the conceptual framework to the process of research.
Notes-3-1: The reference is to p. 42 of B. C. Vickery's Classification and Indexing in Science which is Ref.
Notes-3-2: The reference is to The Measure of Meaning, which is Ref.
Ref-3: Ashby, Ross, "Design for an Intelligence-Amplifier," Automata Studies , edited by C. E. Shannon and J. McCarthy, pp.
