Jim:	HI. I’m Jim Norton and I’m going to show you an application using the AUGMENT system. That application is going to have to do with handbooks, special kind of augmented hyperdocument system to help people keep track of projects and reference materials.

	Before we start into the screen probably ought to take a brief look at the keyboard and the special devices that I’m using here. In my left hand I’m using a 5 finger keyset in which I can using chords type characters that I could otherwise type at the keyboard. In my right hand I am using a mouse pointing device. The combination of inputting commands at the keyset and pointing with the mouse is actually a little faster than switching between the keyboard and the mouse, so the keyset will be helping me through this.

	Now, we should look at the screen from here on, I think. I’m much more comfortable looking at that. This demonstration is about the augment reference handbook, which is a dynamic hyperdocument. We’ll talk more about hyperdocuments as we go along. We’re using a computer system in St. Louis, Missouri connected to that system by a Tymnet connection. In the screen here, at the top of the screen, are some system feedback information, a command line, the base editing system and some special view indicators to show what kind of a view we have at the moment.

	I want to activate a command that will split our screen into several windows. These are some topics that I’d like to cover. We’ll cover as many as we can in the time that we have here. The information environment that the AUGMENT system supports, I’m going to talk about where it is, what it is, and get some idea about how to access it.

	The AUGMENT system supports some computerized libraries called “journal libraries.” There are many different libraries depending on which organization is supporting them. There’s an augment library, and augmentation system’s division, library and others. There’s information in those various libraries that people want to tie together. Then there’s also operational information; user guides, program documentation, things of that nature, and of course there’s a lot of personal information in an AUGMENT system.

	You can see this last view is going into the bottom window. What kind of information are we talking about here? I’m not going to read you the list, but it includes visions, plans, reports, proposals, dialogue, intelligence, indexes, catalogs, all sorts of things. When people of an interest in a particular subject it really helps to have some tools that sort of organize that information for you in advance. This particular way of doing it is called a “handbook system.” There are several different kinds of handbooks that can be and will be developed; project or program handbook, that will tell everything about a project or a program, or reference handbook. These have certain things similar and common with the kind of handbooks people are used to usually in hard copy.

	I’d like to change the view here, maybe get rid of these windows, yes, talk about the elements of a handbook system. A handbook is really an organized set of paths to views of information in a database for in many different databases. It’s those views and the collection of them that could be considered the augmented handbook. To be able to see those views the handbook system utilizes an overview file, which we’ll look at briefly, hypertext links, view specifications, and special indexes, some catalogs, conventions, special analysis techniques, and special roles.

	This view that I brought is a view of the augment reference handbook, just the top level topics. Since this is a hierarchically structured document at the moment you’re only seeing the top level. If a user is interested in an overview of the AUGMENT system itself, because that’s what this handbook is about, then giving a simple command to open up that view shows that you can look into several different documents, other documents that talk about applications and features, mail system, suspense system design. [Inaudible 00:06:25] having the idea that you’d like an overview in mind that’s several different flavors. If we just pick one, say applications and features, the system is gone to the library and found the document that talks about augments application areas and then features.

	It's not worth going through this line by line at this point. I really just trying to show you how the handbook system can present information in various ways. One way that we’ve just tried is to take a reference link off to some other part of this hyperdocument. There’s another screen full of augment capabilities. Behind each one of those, of course, lies more information about each topic.

	Clearly you don’t want to look at the commands each time. That’s distracting. I can say that the one that just flashed across the top of the screen was, “Please jump back to the file we came from,” which as you can see is the view we had of the overview file. Here’s the view before, the highest level. Now, if we look at, let’s say documentation, at this point I’m showing you a little more information. On the second line of each of these little paragraphs are some augment hypertext links. This link at this point, I’ve just marked it, it just changes the view specification at this place. This link under glossary takes you to a file in my directory named “HB glossary” and sets a particular view there.

	Let’s take a look at the user system. Jump to link, there are the topics. This outline view into an augment handbook simply lets the people that want to prepare this for you organize the various topics hierarchically with links off to various documents. Right now this is linked into about probably 2 million words of information. It’s not completed because it’s only been done recently. It probably would be pointing at 20 million words if it was complete.

	At this point I’d like to see something on tools and features a little bit more. I’m really interested in mail. I’m just pointing at subjects that interest me and seeing what my choices are. If I want to have a perhaps a mail system overview, that’s there. We could go on and on this way, but I think that gives that an organization outline overview file can point in related logical ways into a very large database.

	This handbook has been under development really only for this last year. Even though the augment work has gone on for 20 years, we finally got around to looking at it and organizing the information this way just recently. The overview file that we were just looking at really contains only a few of the links to other information, because the documents that are referenced there themselves reference many other documents.

	There are processes that keep a handbook up to date and managed. A recent run, the end of July, on the augment handbook counted and found something like 250 statements with external links, and 12 published papers. Something like that. Published 12 published reports; that’s what it is. There are quite a few internal links just to make the handbook overview file easy to move around in.

	Secondary links: I’m selecting topics you can see from the upper window. The overview file really is only the tip of the iceberg. We won’t go through all the numbers. The point is that the database is large and growing. I sort of stepped in a hole there, but we got out of it.

	Handbook system has to have conventions so that people understand as they come to use it how it works, and as people come to maintain it, how it’s built. If one is interested in how the drafts of new handbooks are managed this document tells you how I did it, and how to do it; file structure, entering information, when people come into the handbook, how that should be, statement names in augment, how they’re treated, links and all the conventions for treating those things are recorded and can be made clear to handbook developers.

	Just as an example, link delimiters are set in this environment to be right and left angle brackets, and link addressing is handled. If I go back up to a higher level as you can see in the guide to developing these handbooks information on indexes, catalogs, special analysis, special tools, all sorts of things like that.

	Now, it’s worth having some special tools available to handbook developers and maintainers, so that as they update catalogs and indexes and make views they really have very simple commands, macros in our cases, to index links or topics of the overview file, or further on down to see external links in their context, or to see questions. There’s a set of tools, we certainly won’t go through them all here, that organize those things. One of the tools makes an index of topics in the overview file. This is before you get to indexes of topics in whole journal libraries. Those are similar but different things.

	This file sorted alphabetically shows the lead in text from the handbooks overview file and the links at those locations. Maybe go down a little further in here. Mailboxes, discovering [inaudible 00:14:50] McDonald Douglas, that’s where this was originally built, taking that link takes you to a file that gives you information on that topic. It goes on and on here of course. We go back to the topic index. Not quite sure what we have there. Good.  The screen is a little funny for the moment, but we’ll recover from that. There are other indexes; an index that shows where all the links are basically sorted by link.

	I want to take a different [tact 00:16:09]. A different kind of a handbook would be a program or project state handbook. We were looking at the augment reference handbook, but that has a different orientation and different set of topics. This is a list of topics that might appear in a program state handbook. It gets more into organization, and deliverables, and baselines, status reports, intelligence. If we open up the view just a little bit, you can see that under organization there are quite a few things you want to know about organization. Past those things there are links to the real information.

	I’m going to return to the augment reference context, and bring in something that's quite different, and that’s dialogue. It’s one thing to have a handbook that lists things of interest to a project, or a reference guide, but it’s another thing to have information in an open dialogue in libraries, maybe messages, messages that have been deemed by the authors to be public enough so they appear here. We’ll call that “dialogue.” In the augment journal dialogue, going back to 1984 and earlier has been cataloged and indexed and links to those catalogs appear here. For just 1990 to date, the link I just took takes you to a numerical sorted catalog.

	At the top, of course, there are links to last year. We haven’t got to next year yet, to a keyword index for the same period, and to some special studies of the occurrence of words. We just look at one of these, you can see that on lower levels, lower lines, past the subject, is the author, when it was sent, this was last January 14, and where it is. In each one of these links anywhere they appear can be taken and you get what they point at.

	If we stay in this catalog and decide, “Nope, we’re interested in key words,” then we can take a link to a keyword index for the same time period. Maybe we’re interested in an article about Japan. Just put in that word. Yup, there it is; the Japan that can say no. What the heck is that about? We’ll just take a little look at it. This was May of ’90. Introduction. You notice the view that you’ve brought into this file with is really just a couple of levels of it, maybe one line out of each. We can change that so that we see everything.

	This article about the Japan that can say no, oh I see, looks like it’s something that stirred up a lot of interest. Clearly we don’t want to go through it here. I see. Yup, Mr. [inaudible 00:20:11]; interesting. We’ll read that another time.

	We go back to the keyword index we came from, we might see if there’s anything else about Japan here. There is a message. This is just the start of a trail of dialogue that one can follow in about any direction one wants to. We’ll try one more. Some more journal catalogs, but rather than to go follow the links and really look into the data and just see which libraries are organized. ASD, the augmentation systems division, the old office automation division, OAD, teaming and collaboration, CAD/CAM cals McDonald Douglas organization, cals. There’s quite a few libraries. The documents in those are all cataloged and indexed.

	The idea of keeping up on the dialogue on all sorts of topics that relate to a particular product or system like augment,  or to a particular program, or project the dialogue becomes much easier to use and make use of when you have indexes that’ll let you look at them this way. There’s another way of looking into this, of course, and that would be into papers, reports listings. Might just look at that for a moment. Okay, papers, reports having to do with augment, of course, in this case. What about papers? Notice each time I give a command to open up a little level I see a little bit more.

	Paper one: Special considerations of the individual as a user generator and retriever of information. 1960 something. It’s way back there. Interestingly enough, the message is bigger, but essentially the same in 1990. Let’s see. See if we can go to another topic.

	I’d like to end the talk about handbook. Just this view. The handbook in this definition and in this context is a collection of views, we were seeing all sorts of views either of organizing files like this overview file, or keyword, or links, or topics’ indexes, or author indexes. There are some I didn’t have time to show. Files from the operations and administration people, special analyses. Since this handbook is on the topic of augment, it can be part of or referenced by any other handbook for any other kind of activity. As more and more handbooks get built with this kind of  an approach, and in newer hyperdocument systems that have come on to replace the AUGMENT system, as those handbooks get developed and start to live, so many of them will relate to each other and make use of the work that other people have done.

	At this point I’d like to come back and look you directly in the eye and say thank you for your time. That’s as much about the handbook system supported by augment that I can tell you this afternoon. Thank you.

