Speaker 1:	I'd like to welcome you all and in particular welcome Dr. Douglas Engelbart to the Writer Distinguished Lecture Series. Many of you and most of you have been influenced by the remarkable contributions Dr. Engelbart has made. The ubiquitous mouse, windows on computer screens, hypertext and the very concept of interactive computer machinery. All of these, remarkable as they seem, are only a manifestation of a more fundamental idea that's fueled his inventiveness. That is that the augmentation, expansion and utilization of individual and collaborative efforts in order to handle ever more complex human problems can be aided through the use of computer technology.

	He's a pioneer and he's a visionary and we are pleased and privileged to have him share that vision with us today. At the end of the talk, by the way, we have a sign up sheet at the back and he has left a copy of his paper from which he will take some of his comments today. We'll make copies of those available to those of you who are interested. Dr. Engelbart.

Douglas:	Well thank you. I guess that has to get switched off. I think I like what he says better than what I'm going to say.

	I guess I may as well just pitch in. If I get started doing too much preliminary reminiscing, then we don't get at the gist of my design for you.

	One thing, I'm talking about organizational change and evolution and that's been my pursuit for many years and what has happened quite recently that I'll just introduce a wave to you is the sort of emergence of a specific concept of really introducing higher quality into the organizational operations and start out with the products' mounts getting more expansive. Out in the commercial world, the Department of Commerce set up three years ago this plan for a National Quality Award. They named it after deceased Secretary of Commerce Baldridge, so they call it the Baldridge Award. In October last year a special issue of Electronic Business was devoted just to that quality with a lot of very interesting articles about the, this is an industrial, the industrial organizations that have taken onto this. In 1978 or 88, Motorola won the first prize and last year Xerox won it. More and more I'm hearing- I visited IBM two or three months ago and their president has said, "We are going after that award." There's a whole corporate pursuit. Kodak I find out is also and Deck, yes, we're really going to get up for this. There's also strong move for this in the government.

	What I'm talking about now in general is a strategy that's been evolving with me for decades literally that was based upon the thing that organizations need to be a lot capable and here's the strategy for doing it, because it's very complex, etc. I'm going to walk you through some of the strategic concepts and a little bit of the specifics and in the end, sort of say well then, within organizations this is the way I would choose to, or suggest. Man machine. I would suggest the way in which we go after this pursuit. Let's start out with, first, how does thing crack?

	This is a statement that actually triggered me into all of this. It was 39 years ago, almost some time to the week or the month or something like that that this dawned on me. I was trying to pick someway to reorient my career because I'd realized that here I was in my mid-20s and I had a steady job and I was going to get married and all my goals were now taken care of and to have no more goals than that made me feel kind of embarrassed. Then what I did was overdid it about picking up a goal that's sort of been the bane of my life ever since. The realization that this is the kind of thing that was happening, even then. That all our problems seemed to be getting more complex and more and more they're getting urgent. It's increasingly difficult to cope with them as they get complex and in any degree of complexity it's increasingly difficult to cope if they get more urgent. The product of those two really means a measure of difficulty for coping and in 1951 I was saying, "My golly, that's exceeded human capability to cope. If we can't cope, we're just sliding downhill faster and faster into more complex thing and we're going to crash sometime. Boy if I could do something about that."

	I got this crazy picture about interacting with computers and sitting at displays and working. You know what, the nearest computer then was someplace I guess with the whirlwind and maybe something like that. I'm sort of embarrassed by it. Anyway, that's what launched me.

	I had this driving picture about what could happen that seems to exceed what most people were thinking about what could happen. This is sort of one way to think about it for me. Compare human organization to a crude biological organism. The way our organizations are now. Slow responses, poor sight, lousy perception, ponderously clumsy, doesn't understand its own workings, and on and on. You get the idea. It's not the organization you work for, but it's some of the others that you've seen.

	All right. Then along in that world of slow evolution, etc, a slow mutation produces a new nervous system, technology if you will. Hugely better in all dimensions, sensing, remembering, associating, perceiving, reasoning, coordination. This is what's happened in our technological world. In the parallel you'd say, "So that something biological happened and came up. So does that organism just replace its old nervous system, automate it and then that's where its future stays?" No. Out in evolution of organic things you know it takes off from there because it begins to find out it can start having new organs that can interrelate. With new functions and new specialties. It sets about evolving the rest of its organizational structure and function to become a new, different and much more capable organism.

	That's what just dawned on me, this intuitive picture. My God, we get organizations that get really reflexive, quick, aware. They are much more aware, can ingest what happens around them and digest it and make it part of their scene, of what's going on. If they pick goals, they're much better coordinated at picking up and moving after it and changing and moving. Knowing what's going on. Much more efficient utilization of all the component capabilities it has. I said, "You know what? Maybe."

	There are many other reinforcing sort of concepts about what the future organizations can become. That's what sort of drove me in some strange way. An image of so much change. All right, if this technology can support that, how do you go about it? I just said, "Well, we're going to augment the human." The you have to have some sort of strategy. Let's start out by augmenting the intellectual work, I called it. By 1968 I read a book by Peter Drucker that talked about the emergence of the knowledge activity. Knowledge worker, knowledge work, knowledge organizations, knowledge industries. I said, "Ah, that's a better term. Augmenting the knowledge work is a way to go after all of this."

	That's not the whole solution, but that's a good way to do it because if you can augment, increase significantly the ability to do tough knowledge work, that's the component of effort that's going to be involved critically in trying to do the rest of your improvement of that organism.

	By the late 50s I realized, you really needed an appropriate way to think about this. Nowadays they would call it a paradigm, but that hadn't been popularized at that time. I found a beautiful article by some gooks at Rand who were doing in their multidisciplinary work they've really begin to find out that you formulate some new program and it takes multiple disciplines and you try to bring in people from the different disciplines and they look at it and says, "I don't see the object of going that. Our discipline's already doing that." Or something of that sort. I was experiencing exactly that same thing. Information retrieval people would tell me, "I don't see that you're talking about anything more than information retrieval, and we're already doing that. Why are you off there waving this banner that's sounds so strange? Why don't you come here and do this hard work with us?"

	They really being very irritated with me about it. Emergent AI group like that too said, "Well, we're doing that. We're going to have these machines that are so smart that'll do that." I said, "No, I'm interested in boosting the human's capability. I'd be very happy for the human and an AI module to work as a team, so I would say the sort of augmented team is what I want instead of the artificial intelligence, as an end goal." We didn't get along very well on that either, so I said, "Well, I'll go off and make my own framework."

	That framework isn't generally understood as an issue when you open new pursuits. When you grow up in any given discipline, you absorb in your professional training, a framework like that and that's how you view it. When the paradigms shifts hit the fan, as the saying goes, you're trying to make plans and pictures about this future environment and you're firmly embedded in the old paradigm. If years later you went back and see how you wrote, described what it is you want to do, in terms of the then acceptable framework, it'd be embarrassing the way you just sort of didn't see a lot of the whole picture. Of course, I don't want to get so personal because you're experience with it is always watching the other people that don't get it about what you're proposing to do. It finally dawned on me that I was guilty of that same thing and then to a great relief, I found that I could just say that's a human capability that everybody has.

	You find out that this kind of framework is embedded in your culture and a lot of it you just absorb unknowingly as you grow up and that that kind of cultural framework is one of the things that gives us enough inertia and stability so that we don't gyrate all over the place and change but it is- The basic problem is that in accommodating change is coping with that inertia culturally.

	Inappropriate framework may lead to wasteful mistrials, widely ignored possibilities. In this for instance, this computer supported cooperative work issue about computers could be useful for cooperative work. Now it's getting to be an exciting thing with conferences, et cetera. It could have emerged, that's what I was aiming at for many years. Why did it take so long? Some basic cultural perception of what computers were for and what you could do with them.

	Now we don't want to think that we suddenly get enlightened and that's going to be all over. That's going to be where this- any time the rate of change is above a certain rapidity, because there's a certain time constant to the adaptation culturally. As long as the rate of change stays up, we're always going to be floundering that way. Unless we find a way, instead of just depending on inheriting it, if we can start consciously cultivating that. That's one of the real challenges because the rate of change in our whole culture and society is really, really going faster than we know how to cope. I'd better go faster too, huh?

	What I do, I started thinking like a nice little engineer about ... In the next slide or so, a basic conceptual model that really takes a long time to describe, but I just said, "Look. You're trying to do something with a human and human organizations, but how does a human deal with the outside world?" If you just take a bare human that's got some latent capability to develop perceptual skills and motor skills and sort of a mental machine there, some of who's activity you're conscious of, without training and everything, you're helpless.

	Societies had to develop a complex system of language, custom, tools, methods, so that the humans tiny grasp- All of this, the best they can do is grab something small or do a little bit of mental work. Very, very tiny little contributions. Somehow those tiny things could cope with large tasks and problems. It's in here. Your culture indoctrinates you to unconscious things, you learn a lot of conscious things you can do, the rest of it is out of control, of course. Then there are lots of things you've learned. Perceptual motor skills. Most of those things you all learned so that you can operate with a whole body of organizational and customs and artifacts in the outside world. These shaded areas, as they've developed, that's what augments that human so the human can cope. It's a very important thing and to me I realize, "Oh. We ought to think of that as a system." It's that system which has a chance now to be improved effectively and I assumed that some academic discipline would be dealing with such a whole system, but no.

	I called it an augmentation system and I dearly hope someday to see that that's, we start getting people who study that as a whole system who's architecture's very important. A little bit we'll show it. This was emerging about 1961 into something specific.

	It evolved to this and I don't have time to go into all the things that this does because this is sort of the fountainhead of all kinds of things that emerged and looking at it like that to say, "All right, this whole bundle is what makes an individual or even it could portray for an organization, that you have these capabilities within the people and they have developed skills and knowledge through training in order to do that. What are they skilled and knowledged about? Well, all of what the technology offers and for here I'm including here the things for the knowledge work domain and not for all the physical activities you do. None of that. You've got certain media that you can deal with and all of these kinds of functions plus more and more that you can elicit from the base of capabilities that your technology offers. That is integrated into all of these things that human does.

	I said, really you need to consider the fact that there really are these two co-operative systems and that all through the years without our sort of being aware of it, we would think about the inventions here in the history books and the history books don't tell you that much about the inventions here that went along concurrently, but it's terribly important to realize that co-evolution of those two things is the way it happened and the whole system over here is very very complex. Sociologists fight over it. Anthropologists say no, it's this. Psychologists say no, it's this. Heaven help you, the MBAs will say no it's and organizational thing. Anyway, there's a lot to that.

	As I looked at this and just- My God, here I am, an ex-engineer sitting off in the corner of the world, and trying to say I'm going to do something about that. It obviously needs some real strategy or framework if you're going to so something seriously. If you want to facilitate the evolution of that, then one of the things that came out of this by the mid, early 70s or something was the way the overall architecture of an organization's information support system ought to be. I was involved with the ARPA net from the time in 1967 it was said we're going to do it. I volunteered to develop and run the network operation center because that was really in line with the strategy I wanted to do. We really watched while all that was happening.

	By the early 70s I knew it was going to be a network. Obviously a network organization and that you really wanted to do a lot to support the continuing evolution of different classes of workers inside of that knowledge thing and their functionality and the skills as well as the evolution of the functionality you could provide inside the system. There are provisions we built and had running in the system we had going at SRI, Stanford Research Institute. It's funny, through all that time in the 60s when I was promoting and pushing that, so the interaction with ARPA and then [BB&N 00:18:42] and people at MIT and during those years some even from Lincoln Lab. I watched the birth of [miter 00:18:47] go on and all that. It's kind of a kick to come back in the midst of all that and I'm looking around for some of my old friends and I've realized that they've judiciously retired, I'm sure.

	Because I saddle myself with this thing even though I'm old enough to, I don't have the sense to quit. I've got this large unfinished agenda first. Maybe another twenty years to try to get it moving.

	A lot of things, the architecture came out of that and then them saying there are a lot of dimensions over here that are going to surprise us because we didn't grow up thinking about it. It just isn't in our mind to be switching through the candidates to change over here, we just sort of accept them. There's going to be many many that we stumble on that start emerging and we'd better get ready for that. One of them, I thought well, fundamentally down here language is just such a marvelous, marvelous invention. What's going to happen to that? A good bit of all this knowledge work is just dealing with essentially our linguistics and our concepts. Oh yes, it's helping us externalize our concepts, Oh great, well then you can think ahead to think of the whizzy wig way of externalizing making paper and no, no, wait a minute. That's only using a part of what you can do here. Why think of paper? Once you get it in the machine you could structure  however you wanted to make a map of your concepts.

	I started developing the idea of structured files and then this is, oh boy, and you can jump around inside of that so there comes the addressability and the links. You can mix all your different media in there. The whole thing, I decided, it'd be very important to start, very useful to start here with some new dimensions is what now is called hypertext and some things we did that are beyond that today because once you get it started, that can evolve. It's very hard to make the transition from flat to structured paginated things over to this hyperworld, so let's get started right away.

	That's what we started in our lab in the 60s. I'm going to run some video of what we did in 1968 at a computer conference. I risked an immense amount to use research money that the sponsors would have denied knowledge of if I'd failed and it'd become public that- In leasing some video lines, the thirty-some miles with one relay in it form SRI up to San Francisco. It was a big auditorium in the civic center that can hold two or three thousand people and a twenty foot screen and a great big video projector at the time that did a beautiful job. I was sitting off to the side here and we didn't have available easy modems then so we had to make our own to get, to put down there to the SRI. I was sitting there running a system and had a video monitor in front of me which I saw things and our display system was very complicated to have provisions for having twelve displays to work in our laboratory, we had electronic assemblies that would fill this whole area here like that with display generator driving little tiny direct displacement CRTs with video cameras looking at that with video amplifiers piping available to pipe the video out into our laboratory.

	We had all that video we could pick up and beam to San Francisco including camera views form down there and up in the stadium there was a camera screwed onto the side of the monitor that could catch me face on and another one overhead that could see my hands and in the back we had a booth fixed up where these four video signals, two from the laboratory and two from the podium, could be switched and faded in and out and mixed with what was projected. Off to the side we put a best quality monitor we could and a special camera to pick that up. Video recorders were only then only things that used tape this wide and were in studios, they weren't portable. Anyway, we had these movies for 90 minutes of that and four years ago there was a conference on the history of the personal work station. For that Xerox Palo Alto Research Center helped with their video facility that we converted those movies to video and then I pulled out a bunch of clips from that to make a short twenty minute thing that I'm going to run.

	There's two things. It sort of says, well this is where we were then and what we could do, but it's also the explanation I was giving to the audience then is almost exactly what I'd say now. It says, okay that's where we were and since then we've done as much as we could with a very very irregular source of support for what we're wanting to do. Let's run the video, all right?

Doug Video:	I hope you'll go along with this rather unusual setting and the fact that I remain seated when I get introduced and the fact that I'm going to come to you mostly through this medium here for the rest of the show. I should tell you that I'm backed up by quite a staff of people between here and Menlo Park where Stanford Research is located some thirty miles south of here. If everyone just does our job well it will all go very interesting. The research program that I'm going to describe to you is quickly characterizable by saying if, in your office, you as an intellectual worker, were supplied with a computer display, backed up by a computer that was alive for you all day and was instantly responsive to every action you had, how much value could you derive from that?

	This basically characterizes what we've been pursuing for many years in what we call the Augmented Human Intellect Research Center at Stanford Research Institute.

	Look what else we can do in here. I've got this file that's structured. If I want to see what's in there, I can walk down the hierarchy levels and see. There's another thing I can do. There's a route I've said I have here. Here, I'm afraid I'll need a different picture than view. So here's what I drew with the picture drawing capability. It's a slight map I start from work and here's a route I see to have to go to to pick up all the materials and that's my plan for getting home tonight. If I want to I can say, the library. What am I supposed to pick up there? I can just point to that and oh, I see, overdue books and all. There was a statement there with that name on it. Go back. What if I, what's am I supposed to pick up at the drugstore? Hmm. I see, interesting. All right? Market? Oh, I've already seen that, [inaudible 00:25:48] like that. Gee, that's too much.

	Anyway, so we have this feature of structuring our material hierarchically. Being able to move around it very well. When we get a hierarchy, such as I can show you here now, I can do things if I want to, just say, I want to interchange produce and canned materials. Bingo. They're all numbered rightly if I care to look. Interchanging them very quickly. Cans are going to get interchanged with produce. They do it and all gets renumbered.

	I've ways of studying over, making different views, moving around, going to specified points and modifying the structure. At the same time I've seen that I have a repertoire of different entities like character, knock off that character, replace a character, make that "P". I have entities of all sorts that I can say I want to do operations on and this basic structure that I can move over and study and get about very quickly. That is the essence now. That is the essence of the tool we have. There are a lot of details that I've left out for you.

	Now I'd like to stop a minute and just make sure you understand that we're shifting from an illustrative material to the real working stuff, in case you wouldn't recognize it otherwise.

	We use this tool to do our daily work and it's- Our system has been built, this time sharing system, for about six months now, it's been working. In that time we've gone from it getting one console to getting about six working now with six more due, the rest this spring. This is our fourth computer on which we've had this kind of a system, so we've learned a lot about the user features we want and how to be fairly skillful. This next step about learning how when you're faced with having this in your office all day as I now do, very exciting sense, how do you put that to work for yourself? How do you organize your files? What kind of things do you do?

	To get going on this let's switch away from the tool we have her and talk about some of the general features of the program. Some of the ways it's built to get back a little later to the nature of our usage of it.

	That program involves about 17 people together with a special laboratory facilities we have. It's sponsored by government agencies exclusively. ARPA, NASA and RIDC now and in the past, AFOSR, NESD and these are the  people that first staked us many years ago.

	It's been a goal oriented pursuit for many years and I think that we can just go off and get a quick little picture I sketched to show. This is the staffing over the years from 1950 on and it's had a slightly bumpy history. During these years there was only one of us.

	I can go back to where I was and say, let's continue on in this file. That link took me out to a different file, to a statement for that view and I jump back to this file where I was and now within this file I make a link to another to say the HIRC is pursuing these goals. Basic goal: improve the effectiveness with which individuals and organizations work at intellectual tasks. What does their effectiveness involve then? Better solutions, faster solutions, solutions to more complex problems, the better use of human capabilities. Really thinking about that.

	A corollary goal is, besides improving the effectiveness, to develop a system oriented discipline for designing the means by which greater effectiveness is achieved. That's very important to us. The approach for this should result in the system oriented discipline.

	Let me just show you how I constructed this file. You'll notice underneath there with that and that. There was just a link hidden here that went back to this view with a slightly different view parameters. To give you that view. All right there's another one hidden there. It says the general approach for us, empirical. We're pursuing this monstrous goal, monstrously difficult, to, by building and trying, empirically and we're approaching it evolutionary-wise because we feel that it's a whole system problem. You need to get a person in that environment working and looking at the many aspects of his working system that are involved in his effectiveness. That's many more things than just these computer aided tools and a large system like that, we need to do it evolutionary-wise because we can't be analytic enough about it at any one point to decide what best our next thing should be. We can only decide from here as well as we can analyze it, where we can invest our next resources to get the most return at an increase of the effectiveness of the system we have.

	This item down here is a term bootstrapping applied in a sort of loose sense. We're applying that to our approach. We're saying we need a research subject group to give them these tools, put them to work for them, study them and improve them. We'll do that by making ourselves be the subject groups and studying ourselves and making the tools so that they improve our ability to develop and study these kinds of systems and to produce in the end, this kind of system discipline.

	It's a struggle doing it that way, but it's beginning to pay off.

	I've given you an overall picture about the program. That's out of the way and I can just move my marker down and say let's save that version. This tool in pursuing those goals, one of our principle tools is this computer aid system. Let's talk about it as a system. There's a link sequence to jump in there too. When we talk about NLS being the online system. A very general term. It's going to be NLS for many many years. An online system that evolved. Right now we consider it to be primarily an instrument, a vehicle, for helping humans to operate within the domain of complex information structures.

	What do we mean by operate? Well, compose, study, modify is the place we started now. We know there are  many analytic things you could do, but we want to get around, study and modify. Further information about what does complex structure mean? We're talking about complex structure and emphasizing structure because we say, although the content represents your concepts, there's a structural relationship between that content entities that should represent the relationship between the concepts of human thought.

	We never can do that very well within your text, so inside the computer we can represent that quite well. In fact, we can represent information structures on the computer that would generally be far too complex for you to study directly. NLS serves as a tool to roam over that, navigate through a complex structure. Being able to find you way and be navigating, move about it rapidly and be able to see what you want to see at any given point. It's how we think of NLS as a tool.

	These are all very important concepts to us because these together, the bootstrapping, have told us where to start. We start by building a instrument that we can sit at and work during our day to organize the kind of working information we need as a task force developing systems. We need to write our specifications, our plans, our programs, our users guides, our documentation, our reports and even our proposals.

	This device over here is unique to us and we always have to justify and explain it. We'll do it in reverse order. We'll explain it first. It provides for you the one hand equivalent of what you can do with a keyboard. There are five keys and normally each finger sits on a key and depressing any one key at a time produces a character. Any two keys at a time also. In fact any combination of depressing, of which there are thirty one combinations.

	It will offer you a character. If I hit "W" it will say delete word. The arrow moves back and forth to give me feedback. My tracking spot changes, that gives me feedback. Now it tells me, since it's an arrow, that it's armed, I can do something. We get a lot of feedback. Let me restore a view like this to show you. This is more normally the way we work with feedback up here. Where here I'm shown ... it's not working. That's an echo register that normally gives you the last six characters that you used. It's not working. All right.

	The last six characters and left shifts continuously so you can look up any time and see what have I just struck and that's for a good feedback. Here are characters that show me the different viewing parameter, view specs. They get large at times at which I can add, hit single strokes that change those view parameters. Each of those means something to me and their being large at particular times tells me I can get very quick abbreviation for changing the view. I can say, all right, I'd like to go to produce, go to produce they get big. I'd like to say, one branch only and let me look just that low and I see it. I can say, I'd like to see one line only. I can see it. These ways I move around, the way I get feedback up here, the way I use both hands to coordinate to tell the computer what command and what short little rules I want. All carefully designed to go together to make the repertoire.

	We talk about the devices and now the nature of the dialogue and the kind of feedback we get from the computer for each of the discrete character strokes and actions that the user goes through when he's making, when he's executing a command. That system's really represented to a user by the repertoire of commands he has, by the function of each of those commands and by the controlled dialogue he has for each of them. They all together go in making a design and to do it well you have to be very careful about the nature of the functions in that repertoire and the natures of the way they're controlled.

	We've developed a very special language for talking with extreme precision about these controls. Both the command functions and the control dialogue for them. A little bit later when we tell you about the programming, Jeff [inaudible 00:38:01] will bring in some special examples to you of the languages we've used actually to program at high level these functions and the controlled feedback that we get, these controlled dialogues.

	I'd like to link to Bill and I don't know what his terminal is right now. I have to ask for somebody to connect me to him audibly. Bill, will you come in through this intercom?

Bill Video:	Hello Doug.

Doug Video:	Hi. I need to know what terminal you're on, Bill.

Bill Video:	Thirteen.

Doug Video:	Okay. I'd like to have him see my text. This special thing, if I label 13, will switch over so on his display he sees my text. I'll execute it. Sure enough it does, but what's that, running around? Well, if he's looking at my text, he'd like to have something to say about it. We put on a marker, a tracking spot, that he controls. He's sitting there in Menlo Park looking at this text and he can point to it, but we've carefully reserved for me the right to control and operate on this. My bug is more powerful than yours, but we can have an argument.

	That's what they call a bug fight.

	In case you haven't been listening, Bill, we've been going through lots of examples and setting up a collaboration here so that we can go on into information retrieval. We set up now audio coupling and now we're both looking at the same display and that'd be very handy to work. We can talk to each other and point. Maybe later I can hand you the chalk on this blackboard like saying hey, you control it. Let's stay this mode now and add another feature that hardware-wise is available through the kind of display we have. I'd like to see you while I'm working on it, so before I can do that, I'd have to set up my display in a certain way.

	Set it up so that I see a [inaudible 00:40:00] like that that leaves a corner up there and I say, now computer, do the automatic switching that will bring in a camera, picture from the camera mounted on his console such as the camera mounted on mine is.

	Hi Bill. That's great. Now we're connected. Audio. You can see my work, you can point at it and I can see your face, we can talk. Let's do some collaborating. You're silent.

Bill Video:	What do you want me to say?

Doug Video:	There's nobody here but a large audience, Bill.

Bill Video:	All right.

Doug Video:	All right.

	Let's go talk about information retrieval. A lot of things I've been showing them has been jumping around and finding your way relating back to the portrayal I gave about NLS as an instrument on complex data structures. It shows them how we can get around and find things. I showed them the content analyzers to help locate things.

	Okay. You know how to file, kind of classifying retrieval stuff. Why don't we switch to it.

Bill Video:	By the use of a hierarchy here, I mean, working down through the hierarchical structure of the file, making use of the categorization that's built into the file. This we've seen several times. Let's, as another example, to really make this clear. We've talked about the desire to get hard copy of a file. Wanting to get something printed out. There's quite a large system that takes care of making a file for hard copy. You're able to specify how you want the hard copy to look by giving various directives. One of the things you might want would be roman numeral page numbers.

	Let's go off to a directive file and see what the directive is to get roman numeral page numbers. I'm into the file now. Here's the first level of the hierarchy. Let's open up page formatting. We want page numbering, so we open that up. We find, yes, here it is, roman numerals. We find out the directive, yep, your bug's right on it already Doug. Here's the directive we want.

	We've worked down quite a way into a hierarchy as you can see.

	This is quite a nice way to be able to quickly find what you're after.

Douglas:	Okay.

	Which me is talking? From three different periods.

	It wasn't just outlining, a whole document, so any one of those lines that usually would appear can open up to be a whole paragraph and the clipping at level and the clipping of how many lines and all that, just were built in from the outset. Over the ensuing years that evolved to have a lot more functionality in it and more application domains and the architecture of it was generalized so that you could integrate lots of different functionality of sub-systems very flexibly. Mail systems and all that got integrated and ...

	All our source code is written in there and it was structured from the outset naturally because it's so easy to structure here, so that was even before it was publicly or generally interested in making structured programming. Very flexible ways to use links. Either explicit one pointing to places or implicit ones. Implicit ones are like a, like a pronoun is an implicit link. When I say, "It was hot." The "It" you can, because of the syntax and the context you sort of implicitly go back and find that reference, the antecedent that it stood for.

	We could use a lot of that with appropriate conventions inside the computer files too. Since there's such as generous use of labeling, addressing and flexible navigating, your source code for instance, you see a procedure column and you're not quite sure what it does, you can just evoke a command that will follow this implicit trail. You say, I want to, jump name externals' what they use and it goes through that indexing arrangement that's set up and the next thing you're looking at is the source code for that procedure. When the printout would fill a shelf this big on AUGMENT now, it's a very large system.

	Any piece of data like that is just that close. One quick link. I use that same thing in our integrated mail. Every mail item is given a label that's part of the identifier. Tells what mail group it's from, what's your personal identifier is and a five character code that sort of fixes it in time. That's sort of at the head of every branch of material there, that's a given message.

	Internally we keep the hash code of all such labels and such so it's very easy to find, put which file in where. When I use the same kind of indexing thing. Whenever I see any mail item referenced by that head or label I can just say, jump name external, click and no matter it's on an archive basis from six months ago, I just go right to it.

	A lot of very flexible ways that this is used and through the years it moved into more and more organizations. Mid 70s we started, we actually were running a for-charge service over the ARPA net to any organization that wanted to start exploring the use of this inside the organization. There were some very interesting applications of that, but they generally ran into the problem that the inside people would start using it on a small scale, get very enthusiastic and then the natural thing they want to do it plan for sort of and extension into the organization. They budget out to a certain height, so it had to be reviewed by a guy far enough up, who didn't have personal involvement or experience and he says, "Well, this is strange." They tried to explain to him, it's all very strange words, so he turned to his IMS colleague and said, "Well what is in this, Jake?" He says, "Well, I don't know, but God, my instincts are that if it were any good you'd see it in IBM and other people, so I wouldn't play with it."

	Time after time it would crash for various reasons like that and one of the really dramatic times was a few years ago. I think I'm jumping ahead. In the mid 70s, when office automation was beginning to be very popular and all sorts of research groups tended to come toward it, including AI people and almost everybody would look over at ours. They were doing more flat files and more conventional stuff and they just didn't get it, what we were trying to do. Our architecture was very sophisticated, front ends and back ends and all. They thought, "Oh, you're very baroque and complex and you had this complex whole bunch of commands." Well, of course our vocabulary had grown by then.

	They would say, "Well, we're going to put an AI module here that will start understanding the user and make a model of what the user knows and understands so the user will not have to learn much at all, you see." Who do you think won out? Pretty soon I was out of resource funds and SRI shut down my laboratory and something like 14 people altogether migrated over to Xerox park and took a lot of stuff with them. Xerox park somehow just culturally rejected all of this NLS structure and they took the mouse, but the key set thing, that's too hard. That really is very simple to learn and its amplification power on flexibility and speed is very significant.

	Anyway, I essentially got banished and just by luck and perseverance we got SRI instead of just shutting down everything, that they owned the commercial rights to the NLS system so why don't you see if someone wants to buy it? Oh. It turned out that various time sharing companies thought that we could get into office automation. Like buying something at a rummage sale, Tymshare Cupertino picked us up.

	No one else seemed to want to do this and I was very interested in keeping it alive so I went along. There followed some very dismal years with the commercial world learning what they're facing and a lot of problems and no money being put into continued development. Then McDonnell Douglas bought Tymshare and Tymnet in their acquisitions to go into the information systems business commercially and I took the opportunity then, because I was really interested in heavy knowledge work. I knew you couldn't walk in as a seller of this and make the about one visit or so that a customer will put up with you, to get this commercially of interest. I could, without really a lot of- Now nobody knew what I wanted to do, but in a big organization, if you do it anyway, you know how the story is, but you run the risk, which I ran of trotting around in the aerospace side and slowly the architectural things that we developed and the reasons why you'd have them for a large organization, including remote procedure calls and virtual terminal specification and the like. A grammar driven command language interpreter that lets all kinds of people's command languages evolve flexibly.

	All these things that began to be bought when McDonnell Douglas launched two years ago a sizable program they called a CAD/CAM/CALS to integrate their architecture of the life cycle of the big programs. Also in parallel, they started doing some pilot uses of this, the NLS was renamed AUGMENT out there and enhanced a bit as a customer would sort of pay for it, but not very dramatically. It still is kind of dramatic and Air Force Communication Command picked it up among other people that did. They wanted to really go after an organizational wide information system.

	Our system was running on deck 20s and they ended up with five such mainframes on the base down at Scott Field at Illinois. They had a very dramatic things they were doing throughout the whole organization. We had a public and private key signature system that you could sign things and then the Defense Department, the government I guess ... It's really beginning to happen, my memory. My wife says, she looks at me whenever I complain about it and stomps, says, "The problem with you Doug is you can't remember how bad your memory used to be."

	Anyway, that was very dramatic, but again, when they started to go out for an RFP for worldwide buy and they functionality that they wanted out of the AUGMENT system was clearly to be immersed in the RFP, but the General wanted to talk to some vice president or somebody could say that McDonnell Douglas would get busy and start porting it to modern platforms so  they could count on having it available [inaudible 00:51:21].

	The particular guy that owned it at that time was at some component far from us who's business experience was in small business data processing with mini-computers and he was so cautious and everything that the General lost his cool and stormed out and they rewrote the RFP to water down very much what the requirements were and a year or so later, AT&T won that for worldwide installation for something like 940 million dollars.

	There have been a whole series of things like that, that were hard to take, but they taught a lot because the paradigm shifts and what happens is a reality out there. For all of the ensuing evolution that's going to go on, that's the kind of thing that we face. The problems of that.

	Let's do some more transparencies. Just to continue a little bit about the early picture of the, of what it is that we're trying to do for humans, the idea of mapping an external map of your concepts was important. It is also important to realize that this is why we [inaudible 00:52:37]. Look how quickly I can jump, like that. My focus can jump to any object on my whole repertoire of concepts, that is if I haven't forgotten.

	Not only that, but it moves to almost level of abstraction you're willing to deal with. My automobile, boom. Oh, the dashboard, boom. Oh, the fuel gauge, boom. What I'm really interested in is whether it's electric or pneumatic, boom. It just moves around like that. I just thought it was very important when you're making this external map, as well as trying to make a good reliable map is to provide that really moving around and jumping. Just scrolling is just, I don't know, we can jump. Not only that, when you get there you'd like to arrange for the level of abstraction if you have a hierarchical organization, I'd like to look how deep in that I want to look and what kind of a view.

	That jumping and viewing came out of that and a bunch more. There's a way of-

	Yeah. This is sort of a model of the 1960s sort of thing that we were building and I just don't have time to go into it in detail, but in here to say yes, we were motor driving our tools sitting on here. These things set up a computer stored file that I can provide both content and structure with annotated text and graphics and a lot of attention to naming and addressing the elements, the objects inside of there, which gives you a lot of flexibility in both jumping and remote manipulation. Any one of those addresses can be used at any time as well as a direct select click to operate on any object you want in there. As you learn about your way around, it's very flexible.

	Your file position is now a very explicit sort of thing when you're moving around and the viewing and filtering and the windows and such is a very important thing when you get there, put on display. Perceptual mechanisms can get the kind of things that provide the understanding.

	Then, other people being able to see it was important and other people being able to share files, so this was the image in the 60s and it matured to some extent.

	Thank you.

	I want to talk about it at quite a different level then, very quickly. Anybody working in a technical world realizes that inter-operability between technological models is very important and its purpose generally is to avoid having information islands between which electronic communications cannot flow. All the work towards standards has been developed on that. What's really important also is to begin looking for humans, that you assume that there's a similar purpose inter-operability to avoid having information islands between human knowledge work domains. We sort of have figured that this takes care of it.

	It does in a way, but if you realize that that intercommunication between our knowledge work domains has been and continues to be very largely a matter of paper. The whizzy wig did very well at that.

	You say, all right, I've got a couple domains and each domain is usually compound. For an individual you've got all the activities you're in a domain and I'd be willing to bet that for most of you, they're not all that terribly interoperable. They will be sometime, but when yours is very interoperable that means all of the connections you really flexibly can integrate and use all that stuff. What about between you working with somebody else? What if they buy a different system? How interoperable are you two for sharing and working together?

	Then you say well, you consider it, domains aren't nice little circle things all drawn off, they've got all these funny shapes, which is a good thing because that's the way the whole work gets done. The basic thing is that paper is the way in all of our domains we do interchange. Desktop publishing whizzy wig, that's really been a great help. Using the computer just to automate that whole process of paper exchange between people. As we're going to extend significantly into online access, online study, online collaboration. That requires a great deal more inter-operable coordination. That's just beginning to do a few.

	If you look at the history of CALS, with what I gather from it, it started out that I send you an electronic form, but it's going to be coded in a way that you can map it into whatever publishing or editing system that you have so you can print out what you want there like that, so I can bring in from different sources, maybe an STML markup thing-

	At McDonnell Douglas, we pieced together and look. Look at all the compound domains that are needing to work together. Someplace in there there are customers, right? Almost forgot them, see. Then we really started looking and you can look at CALS and in a CALS world, there's a huge domain out there for their acquisition work and then there are all their logistic support. That opens up in a whole big world and that world's starting to say, we plan to standardize, et cetera. All these companies are now hustling about, how do we comply with CALS?

	Look you guys, you've got so much going on there that for the most part is probably a more complex set of knowledge work going on that needs coordination. You need a whole bunch of study about providing for that interchange among yourselves. I've been just trying very hard to get them to realize that just following CALS- Then I've learned to my glee that CALS is starting talk about pages of technical documents. When I read the spec on the first such thing I got, it's remarkably like AUGMENT, that's great.

	In McDonnell we, thank you. In McDonnell we've done some pilot operations which were really to get people very enthusiastic about what you can do within a very complex project. All sorts of ways you can use. From source code, for specs, for writing, for work break down structures and the like.

	Then we just said all right. One picture about the ATF program that they were doing. Some guy was in there, says, "Boy I need that." Not only inside of this, but look, when we get going into manufacturing, that is if we do, we've got a structure up there of up to six thousand companies. For many of those interchanges, they're highly technical, complex, recursive and legal. If we could facilitate that such that I can include the links, explicit links to things like specs and things like that and change waters out in that world and facilitate it and people trying to guess how much that would save. They get up to 2-300 million dollars and they say well, it's probably more than that. That much a year in an environment like that.

	I've been trying to talk to more and more larger organizations and say that the economic thing every year of getting this sooner would be worth a tremendous amount. How soon do you think there'll be something in which you actually can have what we started calling an open hyper-document system, meaning that among all of those players and within them, no matter what platform you're working on, you can get that kind of inter-operability such that you were seeing in the film, 20 some years ago.

	That's a real challenge, but if you wait until the normal process of the vendors all fighting to come out with what they call hypertext in documents, and finding out what will really work in here and what the users really need in that environment, which no one really seems to be getting yet. Hypertext is so immature out in the world in general. He says well, there'd be very important to try to accelerate the process of looking ahead to see what the requirements are really going to be, getting experience to see how you'll harness the stuff. What changes it makes and all the organization and roles in there. It's a very important thing that's worth an awful lot every year and for industries that are fighting for competitive position or the economic situations are decreasing, getting worse, it's an important thing to consider.

	The model came out of the AUGMENT world like this. You sort of saw our sharing files and moving around. If all the different domains say some segment of the files can be shared that way, well then email, which we call throwaway mail because it isn't very well managed, et cetera. It's sort of like getting a telegram. What do you do with it? You save yours and the guy who sends it saves his and if I want to refer to one of his early ones can I count that he's got a system he can go get it? All that is very flexible.

	This is innovation we did by 1970 so that by the same sort of process, submitting and sending an email item , I can take any size document and it goes into a library and gets cataloged and that library has a name, a journal name. The system guarantees forevermore that that copy can be retrieved whenever you want it in exactly the form it was published. It's in there and cataloged and can be received and we add the hyperlinks to all of that. It's an extremely powerful system. This sort of makes a record of the dialogue. When we first implemented that, I locked up this. I said, "There's so much question about people to get the experience of what kind of a memo writing through the system you do." You're going to get people to put it in here rather than just wrap it up in an email package. I put the lock on this. We couldn't use the throwaway kind for the first four years. That everything everybody wrote in email became a permanent record in this catalog journal item.

	There are a lot of interesting stories about people that just couldn't stand it. One guy quit. Somebody else never got something in there. I kept saying, just put your anticipated picture first to start with of what your design is going to be. "Oh, I just can't, because it's going to be there forever and I just can't, it isn't ready yet." Pretty soon you got them past that hurdle and people would start using it, employing it and using it for all sorts of miscellaneous things like, "Let's all meet at the Dutch Goose for beer after work." There's a lot of that in there.

	The number of items in that original journal is now over a hundred and thirty one thousand and going back to 1970 and it's just a tremendous history of the way the thought and the designs and the arguments, et cetera went through all those things. We were trying to get it saved a little bit. Then there maybe have been 20 or 30 such journals I'll send to different customers, all of which show lots of history. It's an extremely impact high end value thing which for some reason just hasn't appeared in the world in many other things. Neither is that shared screen which we've had working in our system since 1972 regularly. Not with the video one, but you share all the rest of the screen on the phone. We've been using it internationally and such.

	Thank you.

	I didn't talk about the external document but involving the control and cataloging and back links on that is a very powerful thing. This just shows how you have document ready to submit. Submit a form like and email with a bunch of fields you can do. You submit it. The data goes in and updates the catalog, the permanent repository gets a copy of it that you can't change, the assigned number attached to it and a citation notice like an email gets sent out. You get that email and it just tells you this journal one and here's it's copied to and any comment on and a link on it that will point off to the actual document that you can get anytime you want to. Documents 1972 or something like that, I can just go, click.

	Talking about a big reference base. Hypertext is emerging now in something like hypercards or supercards comes out and look. I can take an existing body of knowledge and I can integrate it in there and fix it so that people can sit down at the work station in which that's stored and can bomb around inside that gloriously. It's a beautiful way to make it so that I can study and move around inside there. It's getting lots of people using it so this other generated knowledge can really be that sort of thing.

	Then you say, well next step.

	Next step is sort of said, well, call this reference material a handbook if you wish and I can get multiple people producing and looking at it. They get the data there and this is sort of controlled information to bomb around it and somebody's sitting off the side can fix it up for them like that but it's not something that the community can [inaudible 01:05:59]. The next step is to provide for the community of users to generate collaboratively the evolutionary handbook like that. The term handbook just grew in my vernacular.

	That's a new kind of dance.

	This cycle of things of which a lot of contributions by all the people, and if when they're recorded and they point right to the current state of any given design or plan or something like that. A lot of that dialogue about it. You bring in material from the outside world, external documents, intelligence, caller information, your community and integrate that into this coherent hyperworld like that. People can develop structured indices and all to help you find about it and the current state of this thing is a dynamically evolving thing.

	This cycle around here where the community's busy developing it and every day using all that material and bombing around it. It's what sort of happens in a very disjoint implicit way anyway as the knowledge product of a project or community evolves. Let's say, look, we've got a chance of making that be a very coherent, dynamic environment in which the current state of this design or something and all the rest of your expectations and plans and commitments and trial ideas and such are right there in a nice organized way and very attainable by everybody.

	Just that idea came on strategically as if we put a lot of energy and focusing on making that really work. That that not only has a tremendous payoff in any project area you know of but it's going to have ability if you deploy it right to be harnessed in very important ways in the process of change and evolution.

	In the trial operation we did within say the NASA program, everybody in the community has, they jump to a locator. This top level view they'd get, they've got these choices, so they jump, open up this one and they'll get this one. NASP? What are there? Oh, these are different things describing within that locator. Oh, I want to do the project itself. Bingo. That's probably a link off to- Oh no, maybe this is still another level within that locator file. I see, okay are these things offered there? Let's go to that. That'd probably be another thing. I said, oh, I want work breakdown structure. Boom. Then I go to a file that's a work breakdown structure file. The hierarchy there is just great. You're dropping down there, it says, oh, these are all these things that are available, let's go down and see those.

	You drop down until you actually get down to the task assignments, but at any place you can have links pointing off to any sort of supportive reference material. People that, since we've got this big complex project to manage, they just drew all that. It's a very simple utilization of the thing. For having status reporting and many other simple things that just fall out of beautiful applications much less the very heavy work associated with designs.

	They're busy trying to specify what this open hyper document system could be in the outside world. To me it's, you know, starting the years ago and a lot of it by two or three years ago I was saying, it's got to be something that's more than within one aerospace company if you want to do this. It's got to be industry wide. You'd better start talking to other people. It was very hard to get the permission and if you did get a vendor to start talking, well, come over and talk about it. Well, there marketing people get very nervous. Well, it's got to be something legal, what's in it for us? No, we don't want to open, we-

	I finally decided that I should probably set up some kind of neutral platform in order to get this kind of cooperative pursuits going. That's when I decided I would leave McDonnell and try to do it. In the end I got the chance to set up something called the bootstrap project within Stanford University. There, to try to get people moving, they've agreed that we could set up a trial platform and support the AUGMENT running on one of their old deck 20s that we could start getting a community of people to start do this bootstrapping we're talking about. I'll explain a little more about that in a minute.

	We start giving these three day intensive seminars and there's some flyers back there describing all of that. We've had four of them now and the interest has grown quite a bit to the point of those organizations are beginning to talk among themselves about formulating the kind of community that I'm going to give you a brief description.

	In the strategy I've had for years, it's always been that if you've got an organization and you want to apply a significant strategy about how it changes, that organization needs a change process inside. You say well, let's categorize inside a given organization that has a given product, and this could be a division, a company or whatever you would like to talk about it. There're people there and they're augmented with these people human processes and the tools already and doing their work to produce it. If you want to improve that, your only choice is you're improving that augmentation system, so here's the improvement project itself.

	Improving this augmentation system. If it's explicit at all, you can identify it as an activity and it might be distributed, whatever. You're just saying, look, that's an important thing, so if you've got something like that in an organization then we can start talking seriously about what kind of strategy would be best. This total quality management thing coming along and one of the central things about it says continuous improvement. They all have high level intention and assignments like that. You're getting, in that sense, a B. When they say total quality, you're saying look. They're beginning to say it's more than total quality of just your product, it's total quality of the organization. You say, great. This is what we've been talking about. There's lots of opportunity for change and real strategies for doing it.

	One of the strategies is saying, how do you get this thing up to speed and improved? You go through a lot of reasoning to say that the concern about how to improve that has very little proprietary nature and it's very common form organization to organization almost no matter what they do in their A activities. We call it the C activity that supports B, then we're talking about hey, if you started out with a collaboratively run, C community and you started thinking strategically about that doing a lot of things.

	In a sense, Miter is serving a role like that for some people and other sense I get that Miter's serving a B role and if you look at Miter itself, who's it's B and who's it's C, you realize there are a lot of ways to employ this kind of picture of an A, B and C. The real bootstrapping would come in to say, look, if I can find things to make this kind of a community work a lot better, as a prototype and it's a handbook cycle kind of prototype, then it really could hand across to there when it's enough. These people can participate and really see it and those are things that as rapid as possible can get up in there. I get accelerated, I get gains in all three levels and you really get the kind of compounded interest that would make things go.

	That's been the dream for many years and that's what I'm talking about with bootstrapping organizations and there are some more elegant sort of ways you can look at that. You can say well, let's really augment that. Really, let's do that in a very intensive way, in fact. Next.

	He says, well, how do I do that? Well I get a B unit there that's improving that. An improvement project, knowledge workshop improvement project if you want to. That's going to be very explicit in booming that to keep that ahead and then I say well, how do I improve that? Well, I can feed that back because if this one's all busy improving- Anyway.

	That's throwing it way too fast but just to give you the impression that there's a lot of ways to start thinking about the way that that feedback can go. Where you can invest in here. The rate you're investing in here. What's the role of pilot operations in there. What's the role of such things as who does the exploration for a given organization about what advanced technologies and methods are available to it. When they do that study, how do they disseminate it and make it available inside the organization? This kind of a tool is going to be natural for that.

	That's the same kind of thing this thing wants to do, so let's get that intelligence collection and integration, something that'd be a very basic pursuit in here.

	Let's go. Yes. Let's go. These people listen too slowly, it's-

	Anyway. Information. All these lessons learned comes down into it, the external world comes down to it, their own internal stuff and that digestion, it's like.

	Then a lot of value goes back that we can talk about. Next slide.

	How's that?

	I just want to point out that these are the- The recorded dialogue that's really an integrated part of all these three things. Community intelligence collection and such, making it really available and a community handbook. These are the kind of three specific focus to put in there that are really- we've got a lot of headway in learning how to do it, but we've never had the chance to really cultivate it. That's what we're going-

	Last slide please. How do you like that?

	This is sort of a picture of that feedback. The community like that who's output is to be augmentation. Everything that generates probably can come back in here, unit. It's a beautiful design, a multiple feedback loops. Thank you very much.

Speaker 1:	Thanks very much Dr. Engelbart. We have time for a few questions, if there are some from the audience.

Speaker 5:	A microphone or a-

Speaker 1:	Well, why don't you stand up and speak loudly.

Speaker 5:	I'd just like to ask you about the issue of vested interest in the United States. Most of the technology we have in running organizations, operations research and so on, dates back at least to World War Two and this technology [inaudible 01:16:18] help us win the war. You have to contrast that with other countries that didn't have so much in the forms of investment they had to protect. Japan's scope robotics, [inaudible 01:16:26] just going right to cellular phones. I'm wondering if by the year 2000, this new evolution and technology that you foresee and that's going to change organizations, do you think that we will, the United States, will be viewed as a leader in this or do you think it's going to be like robotics, somebody else, some other country will do it before we will?

Douglas:	I'm quite pointedly trying to give America the best chance. Is what I've had in mind for years. In a sense, it's going to depend on who's culture really picks to it, but I sort of feel like it could become something to go parallel with the total quality thing and U.S. could really potentially jump in the lead on this. That's what I hope.

Speaker 5:	I guess what I was asking is do you think that the American psyche and the American culture are more compatible with this viewpoint than say, some of the Eastern cultures, for example?

Douglas:	There are a lot of levels of the cultural impact this would have. For instance, the Japanese apparently do a lot of consensus building. Does it have to be face to face? They might like the consensus, but this wouldn't work for it. The United States has a lot of individualistic feeling, but it's beginning to emerge that we've got to do more cooperating. It just might start moving because a lot of this total quality thing for instance is, if you're a winner of a Baldrige award, one of the things is, you've got to start sharing your scheme for the rest of the people. We'll just see because the alarms are ringing all over the places in the boardrooms and everything else that we really have to do something. I say well, come and talk to me about this strategy because it's been cooking for many years. I'd love to have it become part of a dialogue.

	That's really what I'm trying to do, is get a going forum to really start looking at this from the points of views of different kinds of organizations. We get both vendors and General Motors and Kodak and Boeing.

Speaker 6:	One question I had was, it occurs to me that you're going to get the organizational change only if you've got the perception that there's a problem.

Douglas:	Exactly.

Speaker 6:	Part of what you're saying is that, if disaster comes tomorrow, most organizations might recognize the need. Might. Okay, we have the history of the British Army and other sorts of things to demonstrate that that's not necessarily the case.

Douglas:	Right.

Speaker 6:	What can you do or what techniques have you seen over your experience are capable, are useful in generating the perception that perhaps there is that need two days before disaster?

Douglas:	I think that there's a lot of people broadcasting that sort of thing already. A very effective book was just published by Rosabeth Kantor at Harvard Business School called when Giants Learn to Dance. She wrote the Chains Masters too and she's just saying, "Look at what we're caught with. The tremendous increase in all the pressures to change and the tremendous increase in the opportunities and the decrease in available resources, because there's so many more people trying to get into the game of changing," and sort of like that. We're really in a bind.

	It's setting the stage for, yes, we need a strategy. Then the business about any one time, the evolution of perceptions, about do we need it? Or if we need it, what are the opportunities? How much change is coming? Et cetera. Those are part of the framework and the only way I've seen it really change is via experience. Experiential exposure. The words and the gestures can mean a little bit, but when you come have to divide up your budget and different people want it and they're all the people you've fought with or been your friends for years, it comes actually time to try and take out any significant hunk of that for something new and different. You've got to have some kind of experience that sort of says that all these young so-and-sos that are sort of telling me what we ought to do. What do they know about running an organization? They need-

Speaker 6:	Be careful, lest you make the case for shooting management.

Douglas:	No, because whatever you'd replace them with would very soon be acting the same way without that kind of experience, which wouldn't be so good. The same way goes, maybe our organizations are all going to have to die and we get a new breed. That's a tremendous waste and so I just say, look, there will be a new ones popping up. One of the interested people coming into these seminars and going like this is a venture capital firm. We've got all these start ups. It's time, they could start in a brand new way. Hustle, hustle, hustle.

	That's great. The real challenge comes within our institutions. It's more than our organizations, it's out whole institutions. We can't just replace our current legislative system with a new one or something.

	They all have that very similar basic needs and the growth of perception is just going to be some kind of a snow-balling thing and the best way I could ever think about it was to start a sort of a trial community, funded well enough, participating enough. We've got a lot of the characteristics growing about how it'd have to become. One of the specific things that can start working on are helping in the CALS. People helped them CALS and helped the organization see what something like this open hyper document thing, how- Do a really dialogue while they're using these things. In as representative a way as they can about what are they going to need downstream and what's the trade off between closing in on some pseudo-standards or leave it open for awhile? The dialogue about that and just in intelligence would be very worthwhile.

	Then, part of the strategy is to make it so the exposure to the executive levels inside these organizations is right, so they have a sense of that is doing and can see it. Then they can start bringing some of that same kind of trial prototypes inside their organization and again, by ingesting the lessons learned from different organizations' prototype pilots done  to the C community and back up you can learn a lot from everyone else's. There's a great deal to learn about how big a pilot operation you need to test whether this if going to work over a division. Is five people enough? Ten? Fifteen? Twenty? By the time I get up to ten or fifteen people it's going to be very expensive to outfit, train, equip a bunch of people and if it's going to be a significant pilot you'd probably have to take them offline for a couple months to get them in gear. Boy, that's expensive and how can I justify that?

	Well, if the first trial runs I can share it by buying into something where a lot of people are doing it Shared risk, multiplied gain. Anyway, they're just, all these decades this has been on my mind. I've been watching and interpreting and re-integrating all the observations. I could be have gone way off being put, at least I'd like to get the dialogue going and experience of sharing this, because if it's right, I think it's a lot of payoff. That's what I want to see. I want to see it tried before I sit down and quit.

Speaker 1:	Just one more question.

Speaker 7:	How much of a road block do you see towards this evolution coming from the patentability of the look and feel of software.

Douglas:	Whoa, oh, oh. I guess everybody heard you, huh?

	I don't know. That again in the cooperative sense ... you're saying what general group social professionals might start doing. Maybe they'll just decide to pay the bill of that'll succeed and let that fight going on. One interesting thing is that I think some of that look and feel is that if you look ahead to the sort of size of evolving vocabulary of function and types of objects that you're going to be dealing with in there, that some of those metaphors and looks and feel are going to run out of gas. That's true in any natural language, that you move into some discipline, that the further you go into it, the more refined and larger becomes your vocabulary. You're effective choice of what I'm going to do and how I'm going to execute it, if you're limited to pidgin English, Oh, I've got an icon for each one. I've got to got through a menu or, no I can hit control something for doing it, that's a very limited kind of vocabulary. We just were trying to prepare for open ended vocabulary way in the back and we see what it means.

	I have a feeling that those early things they're fighting over now, people are going to laugh at, like buggy whips or something. Those are just my intuitions.

Speaker 1:	Well, thank you again very much, Doctor.

