Speaker 1:	First lecture series of this meeting has brought for us to this podium numerous Turing Award, [Accord Mackley 00:00:10] award and Nobel laureates. This year we are truly delighted to have the person we have speaking for us this evening. To introduce him, is indeed quite an honor. I will introduce him by presenting him with an award which truly recognizes his similar contributions to the field of computer science and computer engineering. This is the computer pioneer award for the IEEE Computer Society. This award was established by the computer society to recognize and honor the vision of those people whose efforts resulted in the creation and continued vitality of the electronic computer industry.

	Those folks who have truly made a difference and have changed the way we fundamentally think about that which we do build and use. Doug Engelbart who's receiving this award this evening joins a list of people that is truly stellar in the field. Those of you who follow the field with any kind of historical perspective will recognize the names that I will read of the previous recognized Pioneer Award winners. Understand only then, the role in which Doug is esteemed to be placed, Jeffery Chu, Art Burks, Harry Huskey, John Atanasoff, Nick Rochester, Jerry [Hadad 00:01:46], Bill [Vanderpull 00:01:47], Nick Metropolis, John Kemeny, Ivan Sutherland, John McCarthy, Dave Wheeler, Ellen [Plis 00:01:56], Kurt Haag, Jim Pomerene, Peter Nauur, [Hadrian Van Vainguden 00:02:03], Robert Evertt, Art Samuel, Ronald Johnson, Klaus [Vath 00:02:09], Frederick Bauer, Marcel Hoff, John Cork, Ralph Plummer.

	These are people who have had truly distinguished careers in this field. We are absolutely delighted to be able to recognize the contributions of Dough Engelbart. Those of you who saw the series that was on PBS some 3 or 4 months ago on the history of computing, recognized the segment I'm sure in which Doug's pioneering work in human, computer interaction was presented. Doug currently is director of the Bootstrap Institute. He was born at Portland Oregon. He served as US Navy officer and electronics technician during World War 2 and received his BS in Electrical Engineering from Oregon State University in 48. He worked at NACA before it became NASA Ames lab until 1951. Before going out to earn his PhD in double E at the University of California Berkeley. His thesis was in applying plasma phenomena to digital devices. The work resulted in the issuance of a dozen patents.

	He stayed at Berkeley as assistant professor to 1956 when he left for Stanford Research Institute now SRI International where he worked on magnetic computer components and studied digital device phenomena and miniaturization scaling potential. This work produced another dozen patents. In 1959, Dr. Engelbart launched the SRI Augmentation Research Center which he directed until 1977. The center provided him with the opportunity to pioneer modern interactive work environments for which he is being honored by this award. Using his NLS as the exploratory vehicle for research into the knowledge worker organization the basic results not only included the development of 2 dimensional editing, the concept of windows, cross file editing, uniform command syntax, the mouse, promote procedure call protocols, mixed text graphic files and structured document files, ID of processing, hypertext and many more things. It basically became a paradigm of thinking about computing and something that changed the field dramatically. When he left the center he had, had some 47 members. It is with great honor and distinction that I present to Doug this medal for the society. It reads, Dr. Douglas C. Engelbart human computer interaction pioneer award of 1992. We'll put this there.

Doug:	Wouldn't it be funny if I truly became speechless? There were years when I was worried. I was surrounded by a wife and 3 daughters in the 60s. At the dinner table it was very, very hard to get a word in that's why ... I managed to surmount all that. The next hazard is for me to forget what I was going to say. More and more as you get old, you find yourself stumbling, you can't remember the name of your street or something. I have this wife sitting here whom I owe a great deal of how to get here. Thank you Ballard. She's not normally not one to make great jokes but she did a classic about me. One about the 30th time in a month I complained, "God I can't just remember like I used to." "Doug, the problem with you is you can't remember how bad your memory used to be." With that, you guys are going to be lucky to get a coherent talk.

	What I really try with you is really weaving into a story about what I've been trying to do for many years. A real thread about paradigms. I didn't even know what it was until maybe 10 years ago. I found out they had other names for it. Then thinking back I realized that the issue of paradigms was something that had an immense effect on my life. Not all of it was particularly pleasant. I really thought it was worth a lot because as a theme was announced I really truly feel that probably the biggest single factor in limiting how well the technologies that are emerging can be integrated into society to produce really beneficial positive benefits et cetera. The biggest single factor limiting how rapidly and effectively we can do that is in the shifts of paradigms.

	The paradigms have to shift in order for us to integrate that stuff so that it can be really useful. John C. Brown [inaudible 00:08:17] concerned today and I'd like to just talk about that. First off, I'd thought I'd read the definition of the paradigm. I'm reading it from a book by Joe Barker whose today's guy who goes around talking a lot about what are paradigms and how much they affect your life. First to drop paradigms forward was Kuhn in late 60s in the structured scientific revolutions. He wrote, scientific paradigms are accepted examples of actual scientific practice. Examples of which include, law, theory application and instrumentation et cetera. These provide models from which spring particular coherent traditions of scientific research. Men whose research is based on shared paradigms are committed to the same rules and standards for scientific practice.

	Let's go down Adam Smith in the Powers of Mind, a shared set of assumptions, the paradigm is the way we perceive the world, water to the fish. The paradigm explains the world to us and helps us predict its behavior. When we are in the middle of the paradigm, it is hard to imagine any other paradigm. The book goes on to explain a lot of the effects of paradigms, how they get shifted. The basic thing in there though that I want to bring about is that if you have a different paradigm about the way that you look at things, there are things that you just don't perceive about what could be in a different paradigm.

	I wasn't exactly prepared for that. The thing that kicked me off that pursuit was 41 years ago. It established for me a whole new paradigm, I got engaged. The next Monday driving to work, I started to think, "Well I've better settle down and think about the road ahead at work." I thought, "Jeez that's funny, now I got a steady job." Which to a depression kid is an essential thing.

	It was a nice place to work but it was like a hallway down to infinity with nothing but a few spun doors and no great events. What's my professional goal structure? Steady job? Well then I got more thinking about what professional goals. By that evening, I'd said, "You know what I'm going to do is try to develop a set of professional goals for what I really want on my profession." Some horrible thing then happened as I made the terrific blunder of just trying on for the hell of it. What if you set as a professional goal to see how much that could benefit mankind?

	What's the most I can do in a career to benefit mankind? I warn everybody against it, don't try that. I was 25 going on 26, idealistic enough to stick with it. I said, "Well I'll put in there enough money to make out all right, there ought to still be a lot of liniments." I spent weeks thinking about, what would I do. I tried all kinds of crusades in my mind. I really need better economic theory; I'll go study and generate a brand new economic theory. Jeez Doug, you're 6 or 8 years behind the other kid that would be doing that's a bad head start. "Well I'll go to education, the world needs that."

	Then I realized that I can't, I'm a bit behind. What kind of crusades could I join? I kept thinking about them. I'd read enough about some crusades to realize that, yes you can go drain all the swamps in the mosquito infested areas. You could cure malaria, you could get rid of malaria, but the natives would overpopulate right away and the side effects would probably be bad. One day after several months of this, it suddenly dawned on me; you know what the problem is? The world is too complicated. The problems we're facing are too complex and there isn't enough time to work on them. Just while trying to figure out how you can best contribute. Just within minutes, something dawned on me, there is challenge. How you can help human organizations and institutions better cope with complexity and urgency click into place and has been locked ever since. I'd been a radar technician during World War 2 and had electrical engineering degree and I knew enough about the computers could print and do funny things. I knew what radar could do about any kind of a spike on a scope.

	I knew that if a computer could print punch cards, it could do anything you wanted it to display. If you could sit there in front of a display and interact with it and get all kinds of really interesting new symbology. Because a computer could really work with you, you could do new ways of thinking. Other colleagues could be sitting at workstations or tied to that same computer complex and you could be collaborating. That launched my career. That was in the spring of 1951. A month or so later, some unsuspecting girl actually went ahead and married me. What did I do right away? Drag her off to Berkeley to graduate school because they're computers there. It's a long strive, it's a long thing.

	Turned out that what I was talking about doing was way too radical. "Interactive computing? We don't even have our computer working yet." We got to travel down to UCLA and see their first Western Automatic Computer the SWAC was sitting there working. I had been to graduate school 8 or 9 months before I went to that trip. That's the first computer I ever saw. It maybe 500 words of memory and mean free time failure of less than 10 minutes. I think all the guys were excited using it. You can imagine that there is some guy sitting there with a paradigm of what you can do with these computers interactively someday. You ought to get started thinking about it and computers were in that state. I had to do some thesis work, any interactive uses of the computer was out. They just didn't just believe in it. It was expensive and it's too crazy.

	How about manipulating symbolic logic? How about interactive teaching machines that are right there with you? Too radical, so I took some component research and got out. I was told then, "If you keep up talking what you're talking about, you'll be an acting assistant professor forever." I believed them because of the way it was communicated to me. I decided I could go to SRI and figured that if any management any place in the world could be talked into exploring this, I could potentially get a research contract with SRI. Meanwhile I'll be a good boy working [inaudible 00:15:55]. Working my own patents and got credibility. Also had the experience of working my way very rapidly into a professional fraternity. That's great; I'd be on national committees and talks organizing things. This was in about 3 or 4 years.

	I've never had that experience since because then I got enough credibility that I realized that I want to start this thing about using computers. I really mean it, that if I don't get started here I'm going to leave and go someplace else. "Well we'll give you some part-time chance to do it." Little later I got a grant from the obscure forest research office. I went within about 2 weeks from being somebody who had reputation to being able to write clearly, talk clearly, invent well. Instead of like that, the needle just went down like this. Not for you guys it went like this. First think piece I wrote, my boss looked at it, "13 pages? I can't even tell after the first 4 pages what you're talking about." I said, "Yeah I know it, it takes a while to describe each concept." "Well look here's a paper written by your friend Bill. It's a proposal." A whole proposal takes 1 page. It's been a work on an algorithm for switching theory.

	I look at it and yeah that field is all established. The whole vocabulary is there and it takes about 2 sentences to describe the problem. A couple of sentences to describe an approach and a few more like that. I can't even get you to understand all this page is about what I'm trying to do. That was my fault; this was my first bumping into paradigm. It's been there over and over again. What I like to do is, let's see first is I'll be covering a little more history. Then extremely lucky after a few years to get research money from ARPA. The [inaudible 00:18:03] NASA and air force, that lasted me until over 1 years. Quite a long time in that community. What I had done before that in preparing for this whole thing is in the late 50s realizing that I was implicitly assuming that computer power was getting faster and cheaper and smaller.

	That would only come about with miniaturization. In those days they were talking about building integrated circuits with transistors. There was a lot of talking and discussions. I got a grant to do a study on making things smaller and electronic components particularly. This was very exciting after about 3 months of that, I realized when I discovered dimensional scaling that's really an art in physics that you can do a lot of interesting things with dimensionalist numbers and the like. To anticipate the sorts of variations that are going to occur in devices and phenomena if you change the physical scale. That cleared up for me and they're all kinds of phenomena that we haven't any experience with because we don't play with things that small.

	When you get down to very small, you've got a whole little dictionary of interesting concepts and phenomena to harness into devices sop no worry at all if there's one. Today pursuit of nanotechnology is just, I'm just convinced that it's going to come. Anyway I was convinced enough that I could go on after this stuff that I was trying to do about interactive computing and problem solving et cetera. Because I felt very confident that the digital power is going to be there. The next thing though was quite dramatic for me to learn as I was reading about all that is in biology there were a number of very interesting treatises about what happens when you scale living organisms. How big could a tree be? Well it turns out dimensional scaling itself that the fiber strength limits you that you can't have a tree like 300 feet or something.

	There's the absolute limit of which a tree holds itself up. Things like the smallest mammal north of Spitsbergen is a fox because as they're smaller their surface to volume ratio goes up and they maintain all the warm blood and stuff like that and many, many things. It was just very interesting. One thing I did when I gave a talk about the dimensional scaling of components was talk to them like this and say, "What do you think would happen if you looked around, somebody played a trick on you and made everything you could see 10 times bigger in every dimension?" The way your eye spans, they'd be nothing changed about the perspective of things.

	Do you think you'd notice it? Well it turns out, you'd certainly would because the strength of any object is proportional to its cross sectional area. The load on it goes up with the volume. Every muscle in every structural thing has essentially 10 times the load to carry. Your chair is built for you that's 10 times as heavy. Your body is then that you'd fall to the ground and you'd break your bones. You'd have trouble breathing; you'd have trouble ingesting food. No one could come to your help because no one else can move or something. That would be rather drastic. That stayed in my mind. Later I want to ring that bell on you as we get going. Anyway, the system we built carried us out. By the mid-70s the system we built with hypertext interactive things and all that was very dramatic but it just didn't fit the perspective that everybody else in the research field and the computer field and the office automation field perceived as how computers should be used.

	Similar things like the mouse and other things we've done were credited very nicely but we lost our research funding office shut us down, "You're not being relevant, you're going in the wrong direction." SRI replaced me as manager of the lab I built up because I apparently been doing bad things. People actually suspected me of being sneaky and misleading people. It turns out that once you get on the other side of the paradigm it's as though you're a political radical and people are slightly impressed. They expect what you're going to say. They shut their ears; it's a very interesting phenomenon. There were quite a few like that throughout the years. It was very bruising, I lost my lab, I lost my job. I had to go out in the commercial. It turns out we could tell everybody let's take that system up.

	They decided to auction off; I went off to the commercial world, the industrial world. It was a very rough life with very little leeway for giving people a chance to try things new but we learned a great deal of that. Am I bitter about all that experience? Well I'm bruised a little bit about that. What it reminded me off is the time I fell off a runaway horse, a real runaway horse with its ears rigid running as fast as it could run. Totally unresponsive to reins or anything else like that just went crazy. Went over a ditch and got to the next choice and it went in a way I didn't think it was going to go so I fell off. I thought I'd done very well because I was bareback.

	Was I mad at the horse? No. It's a fact of life. [Inaudible 00:24:11] start looking and realizing how totally human is this business of the paradigm and how much every one of us can just totally go along not recognize things. I watched my own experiences a few times too. I don't generally publicize them. I was totally blind to things. A few years later I was kind of sickened by it. How did I ever think like that? You can ask yourself, if the ARPANET had as much success as it did between when it opened in 1970 and the early 80s when the personal computers came out.

	How in the world could all the personal computers be built assuming that when you sit there at your desk and not be interconnected. You couldn't tell anybody, Steve Jobs said, "Nope, you don't have to be bothered by time sharing or anything like that." IBM people built theirs, came out in the market, no provisions for it. You ask yourself, how many years? That's almost a decade, at least 8 years. 8 years of lost opportunity for the world to really start thinking about to do to connect your personal computers and interact and really have significant mail. Everybody in the ARPANET was using mail, FTP file transfer. The time sharing systems there were operating as servers. We actually had a server model back and forth, anyway never mind. Those are examples. How do we keep from suffering like that?

	What I want to do is go through how did I generate some of the models I did. They're still sitting there as something trying to get the world to listen. Tymshare is a company that bought us auctioned from SRI. McDonnell Douglas in 1984 bought Tymshare and Tymnet and a number of other organizations to start a new line of business out of the commercial world, virtual information processing. Through those experiences, it was really interesting to go on and actually provide change. The system is commercially used by thousands of people. Some of them in big organizations with dramatic kinds of capabilities that aren't there yet in many other systems. We had lots of experience and about 5 years ago I kept trying to get McDonnell Douglas and others to realize what they got there is something that's really a very basic thing. If it's going to be used for opt in the world it's going to be involved with collaborating among a lot of organizations and they couldn't see that.

	I decided to leave, go raise a flag on a little independent thing called the Bootstrap Institute. What I'm really trying to do now is get the world to look at this framework, this way of thing. In among those there's a strategy for how we can improve it. I'm going to get independent and try to sell the strategy. I'll start showing you some of that strategy. Is this all accepted? Can you turn on the slides please? Maybe I shouldn't have pushed the forward button. 1962, making a think piece. It was a very important step. The most important thing I ever read. There was a funny little report from 2 authors from [Ryan Corporation 00:28:01].

	They're talking about how to organize multi-discipline projects. They said you're going to suffer if you just bring these different disciplines together. You'll get this kind of harassing they'll say, "Our discipline is already solving that." Or this is a trivia problem, it isn't worth working on et cetera. That's the same thing through the 50s I was experiencing. I said what you need is to have a framework, a conceptual framework that's appropriate for researchers going to do. The process of generating a framework was called a search. I said all right I'm going to make a framework because I couldn't get anybody to listen. I spent 3 years then in 1962 published a CRI report. A year and half later it came out as a chapter in a book.

	That's 30 years ago and the framework that I felt there just steered me as straight as anything. I really like to talk. What to do? I said there you need to have more interaction with the display. We did research and came up with this kind of device. We got to have displays instead of typewriters because in the future that's the way you're going to work. Why waste time on a technology that's not going to be there in the future? That's a basic strategic issue, we should still be listening a lot. why waste time doing experiments in your organization with technologies that are going to be out of date in 5 years or 10 years? Let's just generate the video display. This is a workstation terminal, interesting bullpen where we all did our work. Group meetings 1967 all of us around a very flexible out laying processor doing our work.

	That indication [inaudible 00:29:53]. 1968 I talked the computer conference into letting me have an hour and half session. This was the Brooks Hall in San Francisco, 20 foot screen. This is the kind of video projector they had in those days, was very powerful black and white. Up in front we had a workstation for me that was engaged with the monitor here with the TV camera catching my face, another TV camera moving down in the back of the room. They sat there with the controls of switching and frame splitting. I got excited ant turned around. They could split the frame and get the picture of me along with what I was showing. Split another way and I could show the way that we were working. That was the debut of the mouse. This other key set here is something we brought along so you can code in the characters you wanted to. You very seldom had to take your hands off this combination if you're just moving around and navigating and doing things. John was managing the invisible interface.

	You see people working like this, the speed and flexibility and invisibility of doing that it's unparalleled and anything else going on today so we still live like that. That's the key set and the coding code which I'm not expecting you to memorize. When Jeff Wilson would come on there to show the way we organize our source code and stuff, they could just bring his face right up in the back and he's telling everybody. He's 35 miles away down at SRI doing that thing. They zoomed in and watched his hand working on here as he was telling people he was unconscious of them showing that. It was very dramatic just the way he would talk and moving around.

	The way that hand was really moving like that. Bill [Paxton 00:31:50] came along like that and switched over and was showing us the retrieval schemes that you could use for this hypertext structure thing like that. We did a lot of that shared window stuff. The architecture of it by the mid-70s had it built into the system. I'm here giving a demonstration that's projected up on the screen. We call up somebody else in Washington DC and pretty soon it's his screen and he's running it and telling them over the speakerphone to us. We were doing that as a matter of course. What's a little bit different about this is Ballard took this over in Singapore. The other guys in Washington DC were just 12 hours apart. We were interacting very effectively on 1200 [inaudible 00:32:37] I think that was at that time.

	A lot of history, a lot of technology, a lot of experience out in the world. What is the paradigm stuff have to do with that? I made a map of if it starts out as an objective of making organizations a lot more effective. I said, first new paradigm is what you have to do to look at the whole capability infrastructure. The next one is there is a whole system that augments humans to provide that. The next one is you need to provide the co-evolution of the elements of that pragmatically. Then a question, what's the most payoff if you're trying to do that complex pursuit? Search of an investment criteria because the scale of the job we're really creating a whole system augmentation thing for any organization. It's immense scale job so you can't just plow straight ahead. In fact what's an investment criteria? I ended up with a model about what improvement process elements are that could lead to a bootstrapping strategy.

	With that I said, "What's the most effective technology to go after first?" The capabilities from this infrastructure that would be best to go after early are something I gave the name of [Kodiak 00:33:59] capabilities. It needs to have global inter-operability. The best support for that would be a multimedia open, hyper document system. That's how the 1960s something like that came about. Deployment targets, advanced pilots, improving, getting this whole process started. These are photographs taken from a multimedia presentation I can give. I'm going to walk through that and there's more than we can talk about really. I'll try to hit, a high spot would be here and here and here and here and this so we'll just see. I'm pretty absent minded but I can fight fast enough.

	The objective, high performance organizations, not getting into too much detail, I don't have time. That's what I really want. Thinking that today's organizations if you think about them as social organisms, what kind of functional performance capabilities do you see today that you liken it to very sluggish dumb, dimwitted, near sighted organisms. By the way I'm not talking about whatever organization you come from of course. The approach that I involved after all we've seen the reason there is what I call the capability infrastructure. That there is a big infrastructure capability built on top of what I'm going on.

	This little box representing multi-level capabilities that provide an infrastructure while higher level capabilities depend upon the integration of capabilities of lower level like that. The whole infrastructure capability is there to look at. We've never really seriously looked at that before. In fact I started around another paradigm window that opened for me. You don't find anybody who's talking about that little thing. No discipline seems to be responsible for it. Well what's this augmentation system? Well a whole system augmentation comprised of what I ended up dividing it into 2 categories, subsystems. A tool subsystem and a human subsystem.

	Let's just take a detour now and look at that. What we have to start with is Mr. and Mrs. or Miss Human. They very rapidly became very oriented about the knowledge capabilities. Here's some simple engineering model. We have motor mechanisms by which you can affect the outside world. You got sensory perception mechanisms by which you can observe and perceive what's going on. You have mental apparatus can process all of that. In fact we often get the model of what we're talking about all the conscious in that little circle. That's really what's important. I used to draw that very large then conscious just started a difference to my better educated wife I would put it in there. In the ensuing 30 years, I've really learned a lot about how tremendously important that unconscious part of mental mechanism is. The conscious part is very important too. I don't mean fancy psycho-therapeutic talk about the unconscious. I just mean there's so many things that you filter out to observe better.

	Many amazing talents you have that you don't know come from where. That they're unconscious. What happens to capability infrastructure? Very primitive people or even animals you find they're getting a lot of skills, knowledge and training or modeling after the society around them and they'll build a capability structure. It doesn't come with the machinery. What comes with the machinery is a latent capability to absorb skills and to sense things and generate perception. You have to adapt to an environment before you develop a capability infrastructure. There's some kinds of skills and knowledge you have to build that are meant to provide that limited capability infrastructure. Well as the world progressed and you've started being social with customs and methods and language et cetera, that capability infrastructure got much more sophisticated. Started doing a much better job of harnessing the latent capabilities.

	In other words, this system over here augments the human in order to produce that capability. This was just immensely important to me to do it. To talk about paradigms, what I'm unfolding for you is my private inner thing that's been driving me. This unfolded 32, 31, 30 years ago. It just had a tremendous impact, but it also set me apart and created a great deal of isolation. It generated the thing from which I got this pretty award. As all this grew and I've been very interested in reading anthropological studies of primitive societies to find out, before they had artifacts of any great degree, how sophisticated this could be actually. Develop a capability infrastructure that's amazing. I began to think more and more about language as being an augmentation invention that was incredibly powerful and beautiful. That turns out what I spun out on. Then you say the societies began these artifacts.

	That further enriched and all that but at introduction of every artifact would cause concurrent shifting and orientation over here. This was a big thing for me to start realizing. This evolution of this augmentation has been going on since way before history. I was thinking I was going to come along with some jazzy new stuff over here and revolutionize it and alter people. It's already augmented, tremendously beautiful, sophisticated thing. What I should do is go out and find out what professional disciplines deal with this augmentation system. Surely somebody must, it's so important, big vacuum paradigm issue. Somehow that system is not something vocabulary visible so I had to give it my own name the Augmentation System. It doesn't go over very well, it takes a long time for me to get people to hear about it and talk about it. Pretty soon they're talking about some technology over here.

	If it's social scientists, they're talking about something just over here. You're saying, "God dang it, please listen." It's an integrated system that co-evolved. You can't just come along and throw something brand new in here and think that's going to automate this side. That it's going to start a set of evolutions in which the co-evolution will make something different here. As this part evolved, we got say like the 1960 or 1970 era where we had lots of sophisticated stuff in here. At some point, that was quite a system. As you introduced all the computer technology, what's happening? Boy are you changing the world. Especially the information and knowledge stuff. Are you changing things over here especially for the language and then a whole bunch of other stuff often here will change.

	Here's that scaling study I did. Because at every natural organic organism environment, the change of part of the dimensions of it in any significant scale would produce qualitative differences past a certain point. You change the scale quantitatively, you get quantitated differences. It's inevitable comes the point at which you get qualitied differences. That unless you're prepared for it and orientated comes as a complete surprise. Aeronautics people realize that an airplane if you build an exact scale model one tenth size wouldn't fly. Unless you change some of the other things like the density of the air and still wouldn't be practical.

	There's one way of looking at this is as if in some biological organism you suddenly introduced, very suddenly in terms of the evolutionary scale which was physiologically evolving. If you suddenly produced a brand new nervous system that was tremendously accelerate speed, flexibility, capacity, processing, memory et cetera, sensory perception. If all that nervous system suddenly were tremendously enhanced, do you think the organism would now be a little faster, a little smarter? Hell no. it would start inventing brand new organs, brand new working relationships between them. Probably its limb structure would change because the coordination could be so much better. It probably would change the way it's [inaudible 00:43:39]. It just be a very, very different whole organism.

	Pushing on this and then along in the mid-70s, they started talking about office automation. I just got flooded right out of the system. There's no way I could talk to them about, "Hey you don't automate all the old things. You may just for the fun of it." The real power is going to be changing this to so you can really harness that. Carpentry changed a great deal when you got new tools and new materials. Why do you expect that our knowledge work isn't just going to change drastically? I concentrated a lot on this language area being such a magical thing. I said, hey one [inaudible 00:44:26] things about the language was when we started externalizing, take the symbols in our minds that represent thoughts and concepts and relationships that we have in language et cetera.

	We find a way to externalize them. Here's an external representation that conveys some knowledge and ideas and reasons et cetera in my mind to give you. When printing became flexible and powerful and the world adopted it and there was huge changes in that whole system. Then we went along and along came computers and what do we think of them? We don't think of it as a new medium that supplants that old stiff flat non-changeable 2 dimensional thing. We now got a multi-dimensional medium that can make a much better map in that medium of what's actually in our minds if we stop to think about it. I just said wow knowing that you can really make your media. You're going to have a much more accurate map.

	This thing, you got to put it all our relationships [inaudible 00:45:32]. Wait a minute; you can get the computer interactively to help you establish that. Great, so maybe you can make them. Many internal points and things like that it'd be a real mess to read. Wait, you can get the computer to act as an instrument to look at that complex structure and give you a view that supports your need for understanding that moment. Structuring, viewing, what's next? Moving around. Yes you can be much more mobile because the computer can give you a view around. Great, mobility and viewing all sorts of relationships. I said, that's a dimensional change. Changing all this whole system it'd be very handy to go about its evolution by establishing some of the major new dimensional things. Then letting them evolve because it's very hard to evolve into a completely new thing. I said why don't I build this thing and kept going.

	That's where the hypertext media thing came from. It's out of that and this model. It's still to me extremely important and a lot of other stuff came out of this model. In fact I got 8 minutes and 53 seconds left to tell you the next 30 years. Maybe I can just get absentminded about it and we'll never even mention it. Trying to get ideas crossed people in those days about this. Why would just being faster make it any better? One day I came into work and type that there and says it's beautiful. Next time you sit in a lecture or something, try to write. The photographer that went to take this photograph really cheated a lot.

	That's no way it would look like when we write. Big scrawling letters, every once in a while there was a gap because you had to rest. It's just a happenstance of faith that I must push through in our design and engineering gave us writing tools that were more flexible in that. Think of the difference it would have been had it been that? I said, "Okay listen to that? What if it goes the other way?" You can't just summarily figure out what's going to happen there if you go the other way and make it smarter. Here's another thing. There's this whole thing about if you make much changes in that human system people are going to have trouble. They're not going to want to change. You got to make it easy to learn, and to use. Been fighting that all these years, said wait listen.

	There's a paradigm issue here. Easy to learn for whom? Natural to use for whom? Like ice skates? Easy to learn, natural to use? For the ice skater. You get on the [inaudible 00:48:37] skis. Suppose people are just gotten this wheeled vehicle stuff that just gets started. You can come into my showroom and look and get on right away and pedal off like nothing, easy to learn so that of course is the way to do it. This stuff, you fall over, it's going to take you hours to learn. It's confusing, you have users rebelling. The world just gets better and better at tricycles.

	You say, "Go look in your organization." How am I going to get past the tricycle stage? To really learn what new vehicles for thinking and moving around information would be like. I'm not going to get it by building a 2-wheeled device and getting to people, "What do you think?" the funny thing about is, I bet you if we had a quiz in this room about how many people can't ride bikes, you wouldn't say anyway. Everybody can ride a bike. What do you think you do when you ride a bike? Could you describe the detail algorithms about what your body when you ride along and turn corners and start and stop on a bike? I bet you couldn't. Because I got turned on once I was going to make 2-wheeled car. I loaded it with gyroscopes and such until one day I was motorcycling up trails. Some guy with great big Harley Davidson slipped. Three of us had to stop and help get it upright because it so heavy. It really made me think, he doesn't move along a freeway like that, balancing himself. I got to thinking about, you steer the wheels under you.

	They fix the steering on the front end of the stuff. If you tip the bike a little bit, that automatically turns the wheel. You ride on your hands by shifting your weight. I could ride it on my hands; I could ride backwards with my hands. I can ride forward, turn around ride backwards without even getting off the bike. You start thinking about that. How many of these guys are tremendous racers? You say, how many of the skills that we've developed and use every day are we unaware or unconscious of what we're doing? You have to be consciously aware of some skill before you can acquire it. No, perfect proof right there. You can go start using it. There are latent capabilities and skills and human and the knowledge work.

	That I'm just dead sure because we haven't even started exploring what you can do with that new medium. With the new processes and new methods and new conventions and the new ways we map our concepts out there. The new way we portray to ourselves. That we can harness and do a much better job in matching to what we have here as machinery. Because the current conventions and the way we do it match in an image of here's the hard copy and here's this other. Without thinking that that's not the way that God particularly tended for us to read or think. it's kind of a wonder, did God intend us ... There's quite a controversy about whether there's machinery in here that's exclusively established for language or whether we're just a smart general purpose thing that can adopt to languages.

	Many of that, having spoken languages. They assume it occurred after we stopped evolving, certainly written languages did. You say is there a God given way in which to externalize our images or portray them to ourselves? No. We got all this perceptual mechanisms that is very sophisticated. That we're probably just hardly harnessing it to the tasks and capabilities. I've been sitting on that for 30 years, driving forward like that through. [Inaudible 00:52:34] two other models that we need to go after. Don't worry; you won't get of that easy. I only got another 47 slides and 3 minutes. Once in a while I do give up; I might give up the 3 minutes. Pragmatic co-evolution between the human systems, that's just what you have to find. If you're going to have a strategy it's got to be a real founder strategy recognizing humans for what they are.

	Beautiful creatures that they need to co-evolve all of this in the organization. What would be the most payoff to go after? What first capability improvement would you go after? We need an investment criteria. Any useful strategic investment criteria? Yes indeed. Here's what I start to do there. I want to call it the ABC model of improvement. I want you to hear that because it'd be really interesting for me to have this community take a look at this and ask me to dialogue with me. Ordinarily what you think about what goes on in your business, all the activity, classify that as A activity. Everything you think about doing, from product development, noise-making, hiring and firing. All that stuff. Then you say, I've got a human and a tool system underneath it that provides it its capability.

	Now I know that I need to improve some of that capability infrastructure. I want to get about it so let's do it. Well it says, if you're going to do that, halt any activity that's improving the augmentation or the capability of doing the A work. It could be done by the same people or whatever. Just call that B activity. If I come up with a strategy put in place. Say, I got strategy that can improve; I want to talk to your B people. I want to talk to who's in charge of B. One of the funny larks out there, again it's a very dramatic thing that people don't talk about that. I had to start thinking like this in order to try to say, why was I missing out? I'm trying to talk to people. Even worrying is if the urgency by which organizations are faced with change and challenge are steaming up and complexity is steaming up, things are getting better and better.

	He says, "Without your knowing that maybe, if you're starting to get better and better at improving yourself there's activity going on." The C activity that improving that. This was very important when I start thinking 30 years that's too big a challenge for research or something I got to do. Why not strategy? Basically we look at that and say are there capabilities that you could go out and pick? There are lots of things that you could do to improve A. suppose you started isolating, thinking what are those capabilities I could choose to improve A? That if deployed appropriately would also improve B? That one investment will not only get me a step function here, but a first riveted for the next thing I improve on. Once more pretty soon I was thinking about this one.

	Then that's lead me in the past few years to spend a lot more time thinking about what goes on in the C activity world. I have yet being able to find some company that can answer that for me clearly. What's your investment ratios through A, B and C? Who's in charge of C? You probably find a quality person nowadays and B et cetera. Is that the whole infrastructure? Well no. it's down to manufacturing. Why not whole? You want to improve this, what's the mechanism, the process, the budget and stuff that's improving your improvement process? It turns out that it really starts to get some collaborative things. That's where 30 years ago, the business about supporting a certain knowledge worked. Basically it's collaborative, collective knowledge work or developing. That's where the Kodiak term comes from.

	That capability as a concurrent development integration and application of knowledge. There isn't any name for that collection and capabilities that's underlies everything. It's the capability you guys are exercising now. You're gathering some new information, knowledge that you're going to integrate into what you're developing and what you're applying. Those processes are all going on concurrently. Going on concurrently within you and within you colleagues. Your team is doing it concurrently with other teams and with other parts of the organization. That's a constant thing going on. Facilitating that turned out in ways that to deploy it would have the highest leverage of any act than they would think of in these 30 years.

	The bootstrapping came out saying; we're going to go after Kodiak very heavily. To do that I'm going to push as far ahead and as fast I can in the technology that will advance it. There are practical things about how you make big advances like moving from a tricycle to a bicycle. You don't do it by a whole bunch of people. You're trying to encourage to make it once, you got to do it by small teams. Then they find ways to move other and transfer the technology. The whole technology transfer is something you'd like to facilitate. The Kodiak process, that's great. After they start working on those concepts, you get to the place where you say, "Between 2 different organizations, the C activities are not that much different." If the A activities might be very different but C aren't.

	A activities might be highly proprietary by the time you get down to C; it's easy to make an argument. Like the quality people are sharing a great deal of stuff in here. All right, why don't I get special kinds of shared C work and C community? A special consortium, that's the bootstrapping strategy I started talking about. I can go through the rest of all the details and all that. The real thing would be a C community, consortium in the ways it can bootstrap its customers are your B people. Everybody in some real endeavor ought to have a customer that they really quality support. Who's supporting the B? B is the customer you see in your C community. A is the customer. Your outside customers are customers there, so you've got that whole thing focused on that. You got to know your customers. A has to keep knowing about what's going on out there. B has to keep to knowing too. You want a 2-way flow, technology transfer, lots or lessons learned and objects et cetera.

	The model for how this community can work is a model for all kinds of projects collaborating projects going inside. The model for all that community can work is a model for how consortiums can work. A model for how the, a real network or business organizations. You think of some of the proposed new ways organizations can be structured. People are much more flexible when they're in working relationships et cetera. That's setting up the model for that. I'm just so convinced that augmentation, the whole system approach is someday going to produce really extraordinary capabilities in organizations. I'm so convinced that the world needs it immensely that I absolutely cannot retire or sit down until this bootstrapping gets a start. Because I really feel that's a strategy that could a difference. This pledge I made 40 years ago how can I die without having tried it? I almost tried dying 5 years ago but I got cancer and got over that.

	Because how could I finish this if I die of cancer? One of the interesting things, it could almost seem like an accident that I got invited here. Looked over the papers and heard the thing, read what's going on. It seems like it's a very novel community as it stands now in order to take on some of these things, the organizations. It'd be interesting to work more with you. The world needs dialogue and I need people to interact with because being of on a paradigm that is different from the world, it really shows you. How envious would I be if you guys, all you've got a community. The things that are important, you can come and talk about, interact. You have the same vocabulary.

	I haven't had anything like that. That really makes the difference. Until communities get going and share some of this. What I would really like is if it's in some way could start walking in to see, how many of these concepts, about augmentation, about capability infrastructure, about ABC models, about the Kodiak. Theirs is a key one about the deployment in C community. How many of those concepts fit within your role? I wonder if you could quiz on that tomorrow afternoon. I'm going to wrap it up; I'm only 7 minutes over. I really welcome the chance to come and pour all this out. Thank you very much. Who's absentminded?

Speaker 3:	That gives you an idea how heavy that thing is. Really an impressive piece of metal. Thank you Doug for a very inspirational message and I happen to agree with you. This community is one that will flame in infinity with the bootstrap construct and the bootstrap project. Anyone who has some ideas on how we can pursue this further [inaudible 01:03:43] would be glad to hear from you. The reception in Doug's honor will take place now. It's not raining but we didn't take a chance, its right down the hall in front of the reception area. Don't stop at the first food station or we'll never get through. Go on past, there's three more tables. Thanks again Doug for a wonderful talk.