March 3, 1967

Dr. E.H. Herold
RCA Research Laboratories
Princeton, New Jersey

Dear Ed:

You and I have been talking for some time about my visitng RCA. It looks as though a natural opportunity now exists. I am scheduled to give a talk at Bell Telephone Laboratories (Murray Hill) on Wednesday, April 12. This would leave me free to visit you Thursday afternoon or possibly Friday if this would work out for you. I will be traveling with my films and special projector anyway, so it would be easy for me to give a presentation if you would like. I would enjoy meeting some of your people and discussing your plans and possibilities in the man-computer and text-manipulation areas.

Best regards,

D.C. Engerlbart
Program Head

--

March 7, 1967

Mr. D.C. Engelbart
Stanford Research Institute
Menlo Park, California 94025

Dear Doug:

I was certainly happy to get yoru letter of March 3 and learn that you will be in the East during April. You have suggested Thursday, April 13 or Friday, April 14. I am unable to give you the preference at this writing but will try to let you know later this week. The reason for this hesitation has to do with whether or not we can schedule a more formal colloquium to hear your presentation, or whether it will be a more informal meeting. In any event, we are most anxious to have you visit and talk over some of the things that you have been doing and some of the plans that we have.

Unfortunately, my own schedule for April 13 requires me to be in New York City and is a commitment I cannot get out of. However, your visit here should be scheduled so as to be in contact with most of the others, who may not have seen your apparatus and your results. Thus, I feel I have to disregard whether or not I am able to be here.

You will be hearing either from me or someone else very shortly. If April 13 looks like the best day, Dr. Ken Fischbeck, who is closely associated with me, will see that your visit is properly organized.

Sincerely, 

E.W. Herold