Speaker 1:	A visitor here, at Procter & Gamble this afternoon, Doug Engelbart, who is sitting next to me here, is a man of extreme eminence in the world of information technology, as you all know. He worked on things 30-40 years ago, that today would be considered visionary, and we are very, very fortunate, to have Doug join us. He's been working with people in the company today. Tonight, we fly to IBM. He'll be working with our team at IBM tomorrow. Then talking with some of their upstream computer scientists in IBM at their research labs tomorrow afternoon. His daughter Christina is here with Doug. Could you stand up Christina? Even before we begin, I'd like to give a warm welcome to Doug and Christina.

	I think you all know that among Doug's major inventions, going way back in the 1960s, was the invention of the mouse, the multi-window user interface, the hypertext language, things that today we could not have in the information age without the sense of vision and the sense of how to use technology to augment the human mind, which was Doug's original concept. It has been a driving force vision in his mind over the last 40 or more years.

	Doug and I were fortunate enough to meet at dinner about 3 weeks ago in Silicon Valley, a dinner that Bob Johansen organized through the Institute for the Future. Based on that dinner, where Christina was also present, I decided to invite Doug to Procter & Gamble to take a look at what we were doing, and also let him share with us particularly all of you his thoughts and ideas of what's been happening in the world of information technology, in the past as well as into the future. He is truly a man of tremendous future vision.

	To give you an example of that, before we get started this afternoon, I would like, if you could [Bob Coons 00:02:01], to set up a video of Doug Engelbart in 1968, I believe, experimenting and demonstrating his very first mouse. Right after this, we'll get started with giving Doug a chance to talk to us. I'll be asking some questions. We will encourage all of your participation. Doug, here you are, back 30 years ago. You probably, I don't know when the last time you saw this so let's take a look.

Speaker 2:	This was at a computer conference in San Francisco, in front of an audience of over a thousand people.

Speaker 3:	To talk about control devices, we'll use this overhead camera shot, where you can see the devices that I'm using. I use 3 and they're not all standard. We have a pointing device called a mouse, a standard keyboard and a special key set we have here. We're going to go for a picture down in our laboratory in Menlo Park and pipe it up, that'll show you, from another point of view, more about how that mouse works. Come in Menlo Park.

	There's Don Ander's hand in Menlo Park and in a second we'll see the screen that he's working and the way the tracking spot moves in conjunction with movements of that mouse. I don't know why we call it a mouse. Sometimes, I apologize. It started that way and we never did change it.

	As it moves up or down or sideways so does the tracking spot. The principal for its operation is quite easy to see. You'll turn it over Don. Can you hear me, Don? Would you turn it over and we'll see? Its principle is that there are 2 wheels that roll on the surface. Since they're right angles and kind of sharp edges, one roll and the other slide in one direction. Each of these wheels controls the potentiometer with a voltage output, sampled by an A to D converter. The numbers taken in by the computer at sample times as to what the horizontal and vertical components are to be of where it should put the tracking spot.

	As the mouse moves over a surface, each of those wheels either slides sideways without rolling or rolls an amount that very closely duplicates the particular component of horizontal or vertical in the net motion it makes.

	If you take a mouse and move it through some closed trajectory, back to the same point, usually the tracking spot won't come back to exactly the same place it was on the screen. For that sense, it wouldn't work well if you're trying to trace maps or other figures and diagrams. The way that we use it continuously and exclusively, is to watch the screen and to follow it around. We use this device to move that tracking spot and you're eyeing the tracking spot. You really don't care whether it follows exactly this or not. In fact, we had it at times, where our tracking device, you had to move in an arc, like that, to make the tracking spot go on a horizontal line. People adjusted to it and would go like that to go in a straight line and wouldn't even know that they were doing it.

	Other features of the mouse are that, it stays put. I can lift it and replace it without having a spot change, so I can adjust where I want it for my comfort. These control buttons on the top are used quite a bit. I'll show you a little bit later, how some of those are used. The keyboard in the middle is essentially a standard ...

Speaker 1:	That's it, 30 years ago, this was the man who was inventing the mouse that we use today. It's still a mouse, no one has changed the name. I think Logitech, the company that now houses Doug's Bootstrap Foundation sells 40 million or some-odd of these things.

	Anyway, Doug to get this started I might like to ask a question and ask you to recall, what was going in your life, and at the time you originally had this vision of using computers, which back then, did not really even exist, with the notion of using them to augment the human mind and to deal with the increasing complexities that you saw happening in the world?

Doug:	The triggering action was getting engaged. The next Monday, driving to work ... One thing I have to background, is I grew up in the Depression, which leaves a lasting impact. Lots of times you grow up in a depression and getting a steady job was a big thing, because a lot of your neighbors didn't have steady jobs or something like that. I had a steady job. I was working as an electrical engineer, for what's now NASA.

	Another thing is, you're going to get married and live happily ever after. I was engaged and that part of it was okay. Driving to work I suddenly got to thinking of, "What are my goals, career-wise, professionally?" It was the funniest experience to just suddenly realize other than having an interesting job and a steady one, I didn't have any, which shows to some extent kind of what a backwards country kid I was.

	I thought, "Why don't I start setting up what could goals be?" For some reason, I realized earning a lot of money would be nice, but, "Gee, you could probably do quite a few things that would be contributory or interesting and also earn enough money." I set that aside. It wasn't very long before I tried on in my head, "What if you try to maximize a contribution your career would make in society?" I have no idea where that comes from. Sometimes, I almost curse it, because that locked me in, for some reason, to really thinking about that.

	Then started thinking about, "I'm an engineer, and who needs more engineering? So, what are the things the world really needs? Gee, it needs a more stable economy. It needs more education. It needs a bunch of things like that. Oh, and I should go try to make a crusade to do something singular in those fields. Any of that, I'd probably have to go get refurbished as an economist or an educator, or something. I was 25, and do I want to go back and line up with the 18 year olds?"

	I kept thinking about crusades of all kinds. After 2 ½ months of that, I think it was, one Saturday morning, it suddenly dawned on me that crusades are very hard to design because the world is complex enough so you can't really be sure that you designed a solution that when it gets implemented isn't going to have side effects that are as bad as you were trying to cure.

	One example being, "I guess I'll go in and try and clear up the swamps in this country, because of so much yellow fever. It's really hard on all the natives." You do that. In another generation, their population's grown so much that that's what's ruining that environment. [inaudible 00:09:23] One Saturday morning, it just dawned on me. It's very complex and getting more so.

	Most of the complex challenges to society have to be dealt with collectively and our collective ability to deal with complex. Urgent issues and problems, isn't increasing nearly as fast as the complexity and urgency are. This was 1951. I was an electrical engineer and I've been interestingly enough I've been a radar technician in the Navy during World War 2 and so I knew how radar screens could draw pictures and how simple digital stuff in there could handle things.

	I read about computers so I knew that anything if a computer can punch cards or print paper they can draw anything you want on a screen. I also knew because that radar that you can sample what the operator is doing so they can keep track of what you're doing and you can interact with the computer. Now that will let you use all kinds of new symbology on the cathode ray tube screen and colleagues of yours could sit around tied to the same complex and you'd collaborate. It'd be a totally new different way to try to connect to your brain.

	It's embarrassing to say that that's the kind of thing I just tied my life to. My young fiancée was looking forward to settling down. She'd grew up as an army brat and she and her old relatives were so pleased that she was going to get to settle down with a guy that had a steady job. “Oh dear I've gotten accepted to graduate school at Berkeley because I'm building a computer there.” Being off on that now it's been every year since then pursuing that. There are a lot of stages I can tell you about its evolution including the last is when Christina, one of my daughter has teamed up with me to form an institute that's really trying to sell the world on a real strategic approach to try to do this.

	If I kept talking long enough he couldn't ask me any more questions.

Speaker 1:	We might come back to bootstrap a little bit later. What has impressed you about the evolution of information technology over the years? For example the evolution of personal computers or the development of the Microsoft corporation or the explosion of today's internet. What are the most impressive things to you as you look back over the last 3 decades?

Doug:	This may surprise you but it's how slow it's moving and how hard it is to get people to look ahead far enough. To me that's ... in times of such explosive change as this the paradigms that are really guiding and settling the world's way of looking at things have to shift in concordance with that. They have to get farther ahead and that just hasn't been happening. That was a surprise to me but it's also very valuable lesson.

Speaker 1:	In terms of things that might be frustrating to you having been a bit ahead of most of the rest of us it would be in the area of speed with which things have occurred or the lack of a continuing forward going vision like what's the next big evolution of technology

Doug:	The frustration was basically that there wasn't any place for me to connect. We had really a flowering laboratory in the ‘60s and ‘70s and most of things I get allotted for were generated during that period was supported by ARPA and somewhat other government agencies but we were just really trying to build a news and evolve could really make a difference. Then we're at a cross people's perception began to be so much different about automate your offices etc. on the one hand so you're just automating. The other hand it was the artificial intelligence people saying we're going to make such smart computers that they'll sit there and they'll make a model of the user and they'll find out what the user can do and knows and needs and then they'll match to that and the user won't have to learn anything.

	Between the 2 of them I just got sent ... we lost all the support and had to go into commercial world. That was a very good eye opener. We had a system that was sturdy enough to be selling services. A history that goes back to the time when [BARPA 00:14:12] the government agency decided it was going to experiment with computer networking. They told the 13 of us principal investigators supported by ARPA and the interactive computing field. Each of us had a time sharing computer that was experimenting. They told us that in order to experiment with a network they were going to tie us together. This horrified everybody else. It just thrilled me because I needed a community to interact and do this stuff.

	I volunteered to start and run a network information center for that. For that purpose they made me the second computer tied to the network. All your internets I've been on it since day 1, since the packets got sent back and forth. Seven or eight years later we got shut down because we were judged to be going in the wrong direction. Ever since then it's been trying almost from the outside not being a part of real organizations and enough to steer things trying to sell and tell and just so many fruitless almost sales to every one of the big companies you know [Deq 00:15:23], Hewlett Packard and IBM we've knocked on doors. We almost had a real pilot going at McDonnell Douglas.

	Anyway, we had things that could a lot of the stuff you're showing without nearly the color and the glamor but the hypermedia system was much more detailed. You could make a link that sited any object in the document and you could actually use that link in an instruction if you wanted to, as an address to go copy that word to here or something. You had all kinds of viewing options when you looked at a document that helped a great deal doing stuff. You had explicit hierarchical structure you could apply to it that would help you move around, get views etc.

	We had a way to put in documents that were unchangeable just like your publishing and linkage and reference from any place. We had multiple computers being able to [interconnect 00:16:22] between each other and it was a client server thing. Anyway just on and on because it was evolving with everybody used it. We used it for our software and that system where it's still runnable now at least it can show 500,000 lines of code and every one of those is in a hyper structure that you can link to and talk about. Just on and on very different and yet showing it, describing it, saying what the future could be you just couldn't find anybody that could hear it.

	If [DEQ 00:16:55] and Hewlett Packard and IBM weren't doing it, we cannot. Anyway it's very exciting now to see it begin exploding. What I had to do during those years was think about the strategy of if it's really extremely complex set of changes going to happen in a rate that we've never had to cope with before then you need a strategy for how any big organization should start doing its evolution. We can talk about more of that later. Gee I could ... on second thought I'll keep talking because then you'll ...

Speaker 1:	No that's why we wanted to have you come and talk with us. If we were 30 years from today into the future, what do you think we would see that would be surprising and different to us than what we see today?

Doug:	Let's start out with what I believe the technology would evolve towards. There's a brand of it that I buy completely and it's called nanotechnology. Its saying, “We can make devices by reorienting explicit single molecules together into little packages of multi molecular things that are going to functionally do interesting things. Out of that we can make all kinds of stuff especially digital.” It's just inevitable honestly. I asked the leaders of that year ago I said, “What can you tell people about that made it?” He says, “Here's one thing. You'd be able to hold in your hand a hunk of something that's got as much digital storage, memory, computing power etc. as all the computers in the world had today.”

	That's a scale change that it's just unthinkable and you can easily set it aside but it's just as inevitable as in 1960 or something I was telling people every knowledge worker is going to be able to work at a cathode ray tube dynamically what a computer. It's inevitable. That's the kind of thing that got me pushed to Siberia. Supposed it's 10% or 20% probable instead of inevitable like that, how far should you do prepare for it? I think in 30 years if not holding your hand everything that's all the power that's in the world today, it's all the power that's in Cincinnati today for sure in this state whichever state we're in now.

Speaker 1:	Ohio.

Doug:	Yeah Ohio. Christina and I neither have been here before. We grew up on the west coast so much that everything the other side of Nevada or something or back east that's my use. We'll see. Ohio, isn't that near Iowa? No, that's the other state. Anyway somehow thinking about the kind of shifts like that and what it means is going to be very, very important. In the past it's always been aimed at what the individual user is going to see or do. What really was me from the word go is the collective capability of people, how that improves and changes. In the last years Christina and I have been talking about the collective IQ of any organization. That's a very, very real thing.

	You got a collective group of people P&G well there's a change in the outside world that's going to affect what it best should do. Maybe it's a threat or an opportunity. You look at that as an organism and say, “How soon does it marshal the really appropriate understanding of the outside world make a plan for the adaptation it's going to do. Take stock of its resources. Reorganize and make a plan for them and coordinate the resources so it's really marching in a new directing effectively.

	How well and rapidly would it do that? That's a sign of its collective IQ. Anyway, you think of a country so you're start to engage it or something like that and you don't come up with very high numbers for the collective IQ you can reserve in terms of what would be there if you realized think about how you can harness all of the latent mental capability of all the people in it. Its tremendous talent but it's connected very, very ineffectively. Anyway, that's ...

Speaker 1:	Okay do you have kinds of pictures?

Doug:	Go ahead.

Speaker 1:	If we think about the point you just made communities of people working together creating a new knowledge, sharing that knowledge, developing insights that lead to actions in the marketplace, how would you see companies that want to be at the leading edge of this whole area identifying and using their collective IQ, what should they be doing today to do that? We are working hard to try to become more of a learning organization, knowledge creating and sharing. You've seen some demonstrations of some of the tools we're using.

	I'm interested in your thoughts and ideas because its right on your whole notion of collective IQ it also feeds to your idea of A, B and C which I might ask that you share with our group here today of how you take what you're doing and prove it and then improve the way you improve it. Share with us your thoughts and ideas about what the really smart organizations ought to be doing today to get a better job in this whole area using communities of interest within the organization to create new knowledge and use it better?

Doug:	The basic thing is that there isn't anybody that knows the answers about what you really best could end up becoming or something. It's just more complex and certainly managing your knowledge is certainly important and collaboration is certainly important. What the configuration is going to be of how you change all the ways you work etc. there's nobody that knows. Much less knows what the environment of proctor and gamble is going to be in 10 years. You have to be able to adapt both to the challenge of changing you internal mode so you get more effective as well as the challenge of adapting to a rapidly changing world.

	To me the most important thing comes this issue of how do you set up an infrastructure to guide your improvement and evolution so that that can be as reasonably as effective as possible. You can always give an answer that pushes it off to ask another question because you didn't ... next question please.

Speaker 1:	I'd be very interested when you say build an infrastructure to do this better. What comes to mind when you about infrastructure in that regard?

Doug:	Shall we do this?

Speaker 1:	Sure.

Doug:	Anyway this collective IQ we have this presentation that Christina and I have made in the past. It's based upon a macromedia director show and it oriented around this kind of set of boxes each of which is really a miniature modification to a paradigm. It turned out in the studies ... There was 2 ½ year study I did between 1959 and 1962 that publication in our web that's got a German history technology group send us an email a few months ago and says, “We found that report and we put it on the web for you.” It'd be very interesting so that that whole picture there was a very important one.

	Much of what come across in these changes here sort of come out in raw form in that one and then more advances to it. What I could do is just very quickly show it to you by not just highlighting it like that but by highlighting with a center piece of information that tells a little bit about it. You start out with the objective of high performance organization and after a while studying that you begin to realize you don't just go change a couple of core competencies. That if you're going to have really radical change support systems like the technology, there is a whole infrastructure capabilities that makes an organization tick.

	You need to really consider all of that because there candidates all throughout that infrastructure candidates that the technology is going to be able to impact and such. Then you say another thing that was a real breakthrough for our techie guy who I had been thinking for 10 years and about the tools was this thing about saying, “You're going to augment people and you're thinking of all the tools but for the radical things coming on, there's a whole set of skills and knowledge and roles and even your language and the way you portray things and everything else that they're going to impact.

	Then the realization that what makes your organization capable in the first place is a system that augments you.” It starts out with developing a language and such as that when you're in the cultures that you acculturated with in the schools etc. your family and then the particular professional skills you do. Then the facilities that are put together that are made all this but all the conventions about how you organize groups, how you lead them, what kind of roles you have in there, how you establish a committee and stuff, there's a huge amount of invention in that.

	It's the combined of those 2 that augments all of us so our latent natural capabilities are able to connect together and do what we can do. Then saying it's a revolution coming in this tool system so that's going to take that in order to accommodate that it's going to be a comparable, collateral revolution in the human system side. That just wasn't people language. You have to work together and this led to us saying “Our approach has got to be a pragmatic coevolution. I'm extremely pleased.” When the discussion is going on in this group today so far that I've heard it its right out there. You got human resources, you got all kinds of other stuff talking about how we collaterally coevolve these things but that's a big important thing.

	One other thing is to realize what's the scale of change that we need to accommodate. I've always been operating all this on this huge scale everything in the world that the scale of change and the rapidity of it and the technology in the digital world is just exceeding anything that any society in our world has ever had to cope with before in a global ... it's going to be an integrated global affected change and very complex and very fast. The cost to any organization about concurrently evolving with that is going to be much higher and the rate of change and stuff like that. Then you say “What I need in that I need to consider the return on investment for my investment in change and improvement.” I'd like to find strategy that instead of bump, bump, bump, bump everything like that well give me a compounded return. Isn't that very businesslike of me?

Speaker 1:	Very.

Doug:	I knew about compound interest because of banking and the kids. I don't know much about business really. Anyway this was ... you want to look for some kind of business like investment criteria for how you would really best in a strategic sense invest in your improvement or evolution. This comes out for centering on an improvement infrastructure because that base back here with your capability infrastructure. Well some subpart of that is infrastructure that is employed to do your improvement.

	In a 62 paper or something like that. I was really looking for how do you get that amplification. It suddenly start occurring to me that if in this change process I get it so that I can use some of the new capabilities that I'm bringing up into this capability infrastructure. If I can use it for this I get bootstrapping out of it. That I'm not only one major being more effective organization is boosting your product cycle. Well if not only that if I can bring in new capabilities and if I had an appropriate improvement infrastructure and I plug those new capabilities into there, can I get an improvement cycle speeding and getting better too? This is great. That's what led me into the particular kind of capabilities here that we call the collective IQ.

	To better way to frame this and build and work on and develop the ideas underneath that box are the same kind of things we can put into the improvement structure etc. Then it says, “You're making headway. You're getting this collective IQ pursued etc.” Then you need some there's one massive kind of requirement based upon this that you find these magic things that work for Procter & Gamble well you got to make sure that you can also work with the outside world and not island.

	This interoperability and we right at the time in the ... the company that bought us from Stanford Research Institute and the commercial time sharing business got bought up by McDonnell Douglas so I could have a chance to go and talk to the heavy industry people about their use of it. It was really terrific to find out how you could probably augment the whole process by which you develop an airplane design. Not only that by the concurrently how you develop the manufacturing capability to do that. Not only that, by how you develop the community of top level suppliers who have to co-design things in your aircraft like that.

	Not only that, by how you can interoperate with the end users which have a great deal of interaction back and forth as you do the logistic support and the upgrading of models and something like that. This interoperability was great. Then this kind of a picture of the in the end what's got be needed out here is a globally interoperable open hyper document system. We just invented that name in the late ‘80s as just saying it's inevitable. It's got to be hyper linkage multimedia and it has to be an open system. The html kind of thing in there is just proving that case where you can dive around and get into there.

	It doesn't mean it can't be all folded up and tucked away in a database system at all but conceptually it's still a document when you unfold it for the viewing etc. and then like that. There are a lot of things if we dig down underneath that box there are a lot of things we did in there that are still open for exploration and such that other people haven't done. Then there's a question of deploying all that which is a very important thing as you make headway within your organization how best to deploy it from a strategic point of view.

	Out of that comes one of the important pictures about high performance teams that are selected and recruited and equipped and trained to be really high performance knowledge workers on new levels that you can't get by, by just getting to be good at what the current products can be harnessed and such like that. There's a need to prototypes like that. Then you need to find ways to deploy them within an organization so they not only can effectively utilize that extra capability they have but that their interaction with that has a way for the other people in the organization to see and rub shoulders and get the feeling for what you're going to do if you can get trained etc. to new levels.

	This means in this open hyper document system you need a way in which you can have multiple grades of user proficiency with the appropriate interfaces for them and such. A lot of these strategic stuff comes out and if we possible to go after then you start talking about “Then how you can do that if you have an improving infrastructure it's appropriate in the organization.” Then you can actually hike that structure and move it up a little so that you can get coordinating, cooperating communities of organization saying “There's a lot in common that we could collectively work on that would help us improve our improvement process.”

	It goes on from there but that's the high level thing and we can spend 3 days and look deeper into it but I'm not going to. There are some really key things especially up in here and here and here and here.

Speaker 1:	I think it would be quite interesting if you might be to share by way of example or concept the A, B, C approach that is in here but you didn't quite lay out in that very straightforward fashion like we did with [Dirk 00:35:35] earlier today. The concept here is Doug teases up is any organization is operating its business or its government a certain way today and probably every organization is trying to improve the way they do that. The first is A and the improvement is B. the thing that I found fascinating and elegantly simple in Doug's thinking is there's C how do you improve the way you improve and get that ROI curve to be compounded as opposed to incrementally growing. If you could tell us a bit more about that that would be great.

Doug:	It started with if you have a human and tool system you're augmenting your organization and you're going to want to go through this set of thinking. You start categorizing the activity that you find in the organization. Everyday chunking along away and that includes hiring people and training them to do the jobs that are there today and doing product development the way you do and selling etc. etc., etc. If you're trying to improve any part of your augmentation system, then you put on a different hat and just give it a different name say its B activity. It's not an inventing new activity, it just inventing a label that helps do some thinking in a certain way.

	Then the idea if you're coming into an era of much more rapid complex change whereas B has been semi casual thing through all the years who put up a cross functional committee to do something that's going to improve this or that packaging or something. They work at it together and do their thing and it gets changed or you get a consultant to come in and make plan of change. You say, “B is going to be so much more critical and we're going to live and die by it as much as we live and die by anything we do in any world.” You say, “You want to improve that then you need to realize that if its serious work you got to give it another category.” This A, B, C emerged and it really has helped a lot as basis for that infrastructure. You had some comments?

Speaker 1:	The thing I find fascinating about this l think Procter & Gamble probably does a pretty good job with A&B but I'm not sure we thought too much about C. C being a catalyst or synergizer that improves the way you improve. Any company that can start to systematize that in the way they think about their business and how they're going to improve their business is going to end up with a competitive advantage because you're immediately thinking about beyond today's improvement. It's how do you improve the way you improve. I found that very compelling and very powerful especially for a company with intrinsically a high collective IQ.

	Procter & Gamble is a company of 106,000 people. We try hard to hire the brightest and best people we can around the world. We try to give them stimulating, challenging jobs and work. If you collect all the IQs of those 106,000 people, it would be a rather awesome chunk of brainpower there. I think most of our brainpower frankly is in A. Pick a number? 75% maybe 29% whatever ... I'll bet 1% is of our work is on C. I have no idea if you all would share that perception but that's the way I feel about it having worked across a variety of businesses.

	We're so busy running hard at A that maybe Friday night on the way home to catch a glass of wine or a beer you might think a little bit about B and forget C it's not on the horizon. I think that's a very compelling, conceptual framework and the role we that we have as information technology professionals I think we need to provide some intellectual leadership on this. If we were to take some part of our business whether it's R&D or product supply or our own business, what would we be doing if we wanted to move more in this direction intellectually?

	Maybe take a pilot project or some kind and really think it through. We are saying we want to accelerate our ability to innovate and its true we do our corporate sales growth as lackadaisical relative to what we like it to be. Its better this year than last year then I just have a hunch that there's the seed of an idea planted in Doug's concept here that we ought maybe plant somewhere and try and grow. I have no idea what that means when I say that but I find this a very intriguing way to think about how we can change the way we do our work so we have a continuous way of always doing it faster and more importantly better.

Doug:	This more maturing to this that you might be interested in if we look. One thing about it is the relationship between them. It's like who's the customer and the supplier. Well between B and A and between C and B that's something to think about it as you're organize C it's trying to help B. then another thing is that any given person might have a B hat on for 6, 8, 2, 3, 4 hours a week or whatever or C hat even and so it isn't that's just special teams of people necessarily. You can get them in there but you have to think of it as activities so you might be engaged in those various kinds at different times. The idea is clear.

	Another thing is most industries already know what percentage of their revenue goes back into product R&D but you find out that almost none of them knows about the B much less the C. Since well it's going to be a life threatening ... there's another area in here if we think about moving around in this getting collectively smarter and interoperable and deploying like this was this thing we talked about this collective network improvement community.

	Let's just a look about that and saying suppose here's Procter & Gamble and yes we recognize that. We want to get better at doing C etc. well there some of the characteristics about that that are interesting. We say, “Down the street come on what's the matter. There's organization number 2 and we could probably find a number them that we some kind of interest in collectively. Should we stay away from our competitors or do they have to be near us the same or what. Let's just say what we're interested in is sharing the C work and say, “Let's consider in somehow making an alliance among ourselves that for a given set of improvement capabilities.”

	We're trying work inside our A that mean our B's have in common between ourselves because we're all interested say in knowledge management or something like that. We can share a lot of the work of building up the new C stuff without giving away proprietary stuff up here in the A and all and the B like that but they'd be very important. The thing then next the challenge is to say, “How many things are there that we can do collectively at that C level that pay off, that it sort of multiplies the results that we get?” You'd say, “Well there's a lot.” We can make it a quiz. Can we get them a quiz to see if they're awake?

	Intelligence collection about what's going on in the outside world. For instance, if this is something that they're interested they just pick knowledge management that we want to improve. What's going on in the outside world? Part of the tools that are being developed. What are the practices they're doing? How do we analyze that? Can we collectively fund some real work at doing scenario development out there so that we get a better feel? Can we collectively invest in some pilot operations to shake things down? There's a lot like that. Can we have some training in there for people?

	When I looked at your catalogue and the other network things that you guys ... that were demonstrated for us the time before you all came this very impressive thing. You look at it and says, “We need to do that same thing for the knowledge that every B in here needs in order for this thing.” Then what kind of experience can we provide because a lot of the implicit knowledge doesn't come just with what you can give them like that. What you need to do is get people that rotate from working in this B are to coming into the C and helping do this work here.

	You'd like to invest enough collectively in the C so you're using the most advanced capabilities and tools that you can actually do and actually piloting some things that are downstream so we all get to learn about it. Back in some of the other boxes we get down we look at the market place and say why it needs an infrastructure like this and etc.

Speaker 1:	I'd like to open this up a little bit rather than make this a dialogue up here with myself and Doug to invite you to ask questions or make comments and stimulate other discussion and ideas. Why don't we open this up to anybody who'd like to ask a question? Patrick your hand is up first.

Patrick:	I have basic questions to better understand the A, B and C. I'm going to give an example of how we work and see [inaudible 00:45:41] When we introduce a new system in a plant for example to improve the plant working and about [inaudible 00:45:49] management. A few years ago it would take us 12 to 18 months to do plant. Today you are in a system that we can do a plant in 3 or 4 months bringing that to 18 to 3 or 4 months, do you consider that a C activity or is that B? You understand the question?

Doug:	That was a B activity. You're actually designing and implementing that improvement and getting it up ...

Patrick:	[inaudible 00:46:22] Implementing the system and 18 months was a B activity to improve the way the people did so implementing is possible [inaudible 00:46:33].

Speaker 1:	Let me try a translation and have Doug come in. what seem to me that the original plant activity was an A 12 to 18 months and the B was getting it down to the lesser number. I think the point Doug would make and please speak for yourself Doug would be how do you take that and improve that. That would be true C get it down to 1 month for example. I don't know if I've said an appropriate analog back to your model.

Doug:	It comes to that. Building a new plant is an A. you're doing it but unless you're doing that better than you used to do before, then it wasn't a B but if you got a process for building a new plant that really does it a lot better well implementing that was a B process. Finding out how to do it and getting the ideas and stuff would have been C. if you'd been going to conferences etc. and investing energy and getting the position where you could do that that would be a C. It gets more subtle and especially it gets more subtle when we go on for other stages about this kind of infrastructure because I like saying here we call a network improvement community a NIC.

	You look around saying, “There are a lot of improvement communities and if there aren't really network and trying to do it in a modern way we call them an ICK.” The meeting in this bootstrap alliance that we have people interested in that like Sun and Netscape got in nearly a year and half almost 2 years ago to say “Hey let's start making this happen.” This encourage us we got more people and success is set a quarterly meeting its just getting more and more dynamics going on. This concept has evolved in the point of that.

	One of the evolutions and I can just show you is in this other sense of here but its saying, “Here's the NIC idea.” In other parts of our presentation there we go on and say any organization is going to have to have a knowledge repository. If it's going to do this collective IQ stuff it just means that you got make shareable knowledge that's available to all the parts of the organism in there like that. Then to all 16, 17 years ago the idea was oriented about there's several discernable parts to that. One is the intelligence collection of what you brought in from the outside world. The other then so you're recording a lot of the dialogue that was on the different ideas and the arguments and all the email and stuff and that.

	At one point in some sense the catalogue part that was shown here earlier there's the knowledge product. What is it today that you can bomb into to find out the situation that we understand? What's the applicable knowledge that's available today in here? It can't just be all of the undigested stuff you find here. We have to find a digestion integration process. Remember that [Kodiak 00:50:09] idea was developing, integrating and applying. The applicable knowledge here has to be in a form that's accessible to reach is really useful know.

	In a sense it's like electronic handbook about how you can do your work. In this case because this is a NIC it'd be electronic handbook of how the Bs can better do their work. They're going to be busy investing and building the same things for their respective A groups so it's a very interesting way in which the propagation can go and all of that.

	Then we got to thinking about “Well that's going to be very important. Oh, well then what about this?” This was a shift that occurred then a year or so ago and saying “In the alliance we want to make that really would be benefit is we want to make a NIC of NICs, alliance of NICs so that the role of this one is how do you get your NIC to be better and better?” You're going to have NICs pursuing all kinds of things and this provides a meta level improvement infrastructure that the more you think about it, the more potency it has.

	It's like saying, “You guys could go in and you have 1 particular kind of processing interest maybe.” I'm staying away from the knowledge management because it's so universal but say there's a certain kind of processing capability or chemical processing or manufacturing that you know could be improved or the quality movement was an example. That you can find other organizations who could share the C level stuff about that collectively going after it. You all need to know you have together establishment better and so getting the basic capability and so how you're doing improvement can be pegged.

	We're finding quite a few examples of that out there like that. Then you say, “If you formed a NIC like that and became part of the alliance, then collectively you invest time and energy in here too to do things that you're going to have to do anyway.” This is a current picture and we've got some interesting emergent NICs lined up to come to that etc. this is the kind of way it's going where you can even think about a national improvement infrastructure based on this. Forming, getting it to some kind of NIC would be a payoff to Procter & Gamble which I think in the end you'd get in there and you probably find quite a few special interest NICs that would be very relevant for you to participate in.

Speaker 1:	Very interesting. Ted?

Ted:	I'm interested in hearing more about the 30 years from now applications of that power you talked about in your handbook. What kind of application would you see [inaudible 00:53:08] computer surgery with no incision or it finds the right spot that internally ... what do you see?

Doug:	You chug your imagination all over but you'll know that that will make so much bandwidth available in any kind of wireless form that you carry around with all you need. It might even be surgically implanted so that it gets the energy it needs metabolism. While it's at it, it keeps a check on your white count, what's going on and everything like that and really do a lot of monitoring and actually therapeutic biochemical therapy. Then you say, “Can it intercept signals in a lot of my nerve channels?” Well yeah. Could that help [amplify 00:53:59] my sensory capability? Probably. You can just really go in to things like that where you could just start to become a bionically amplified person and some of this is really horrifying or revolting but it's apparent.

Speaker 1:	It sounds like fun to me.

Doug:	The other one is saying like why would ever have to go someplace because you can get the same sensations provided to you as being at any place etc. so why would you move around and so oh to be very efficient because the population has grown so much that you've got space wise you've got about 6 ½ feet by 2 feet by 3 feet and that's your space in the world and you never have to leave it because you can be connected out there and you can be fed intravenously of course etc. This is a very hyperefficient world some people could picture and it makes me sick.

	Whereas we could also go about saying, “By that time we could be collectively smart enough so we could understand social and political dynamics enough to get some kind of stability there and really understand where empathy and bonding and all of that come from so we could actually design and implement and maintain a rational human centered earth that could be really terrific.” Before that comes with either those options they're likely to be traumatic dislocations that occur because globally we're not smart enough to cope with a lot of the changes.

	Look at the Asian financial crisis catching us by surprise. Why the hell did it surprise us? See we weren't smart enough. We're managing it now. What's next? It just seemed to me with horrendously compelling something or other that if there's really something to this potential of boosting your collective IQ, getting after that as early as we can to forestall some of the calamities which could end up ... a crisis happened which the whole financial thing collapsed and to think through what would happen if the global financial structure collapsed one afternoon, what would happen?

	You say, “Is there any imaginable process that could get it going again?” Not that I know of. If you had to start all the way up with barter and everything else like that, billions of people would die within weeks. We'd be put back in the feudal age because you'd have to group together with armed combat in order to protect your turf and try to go steal the food that you need to keep your group alive or something. Just horrible scenes about what could happen.

	The thing that keeps me going tottering along years after sensibly one would retire is every year sooner that the world take seriously the potential for going after this boost of IQ, boost of [inaudible 00:57:09] deal collectively gives us a better chance for survival. That's what keeps me going. It also happens to give me this slightly zealous approach you know grabbing by the throat and says, [inaudible 00:57:25] but to me it's deadly real.

	The potential is really, really there and very exciting but how do you wake up the world to just go after it as a really, really something special not just that we're going to get 10% better next year but says “Hey we're going to start taking steps that we can climb the hill and get better at it.” Which pulpit do you listen to on Sundays?

Speaker 1:	Other questions. Yeah?

Speaker 4:	You put together these NICs you start working on them to create this knowledge product. You need to work together you mentioned on slide here around collaborative [inaudible 00:58:10]. What do you see over the next 5 to 10 years? From a collaborative tool standpoint, how do you see that working? What should we be looking at as we think about how to help our people collaborate better?

Doug:	If I lived up to what I've been doing, I'll have to make an indirect approach to that. The way I'll do it is go back up to another potential there. First I want to show you what this picture is. This emerged about 1961 and technology guide thinking “Oh boy we're going to do all these things.” Slowly I begin to be aware of things over in this side. Finally I start to list them. That just sobered me up so much that if anything I've been more leaning on that side even though I get applauded of the things in here.

	I keep saying, “The only way that going to get harmed is by changes in here.” That's really, really ... I can't emphasize it enough in any image about the changes of that stuff like that. You have to think of the cooperative changes with that thing and there like that. This led looking at a picture like this or the saying “I've got my tools.”

	Technology is changing and improving in this direction and it's just exploded that normally relative to where organizations are today in harnessing technology with whatever human system they do, they would all be used to living in this first quadrant down there that the technology is only moving advancing that far ahead of what we already used but suddenly it spurting here like that where their capabilities that you know could be built that wouldn't know how to reintegrate into an organization.

	We can go to examples of that but it's just really the case. This things of saying that that's where you can look at the current market place and realize hey the vendors aren't responsibility for telling you much about what's out there. They're responsible to their stockholders for capturing the market that's evolving out here. They need to be good at hyping and telling and guessing at sort of like that because ... we're talking about organizational utilization so the end user organization so just not been proactive at all about being in this, about what could they do if and how would they employ it and what do they need and what are the standard stuff that they need.

	They're passively being led around and that's just not going to do them ... the big example I point to is the computer world ignored the network. All this network stuff started in 1970 so say it was early 80s it was really working. It wasn't until 90 something 3 or something like that they got ... where you couldn't tell them that that was going to be critically important. Sun Microsystem says, “Hey the network is the computer.” It just wasn't there and yet that's such a tremendously important thing to end user organization.

	Just as examples unless end user organizations get proactive about starting to explore for themselves conceptually instead of what's here and funding some things that give prototypes out there that like the frontier out there saying, “We need to think outpost out in that frontier that help us know what's there.” Otherwise Procter & Gamble as progressive it might be, goes wandering out on here and falls of a cliff or gets mired in a swamp.

Speaker 1:	This is a very challenging area. I go for example to Microsoft every 6 months for a global executive round table. Because of the nature of the church of the technology and the pace of which it is moving and the competitive focus and all the end users who buy all this stuff are really the tail on the duck. It's very difficult to get any insight. In my view that's very meaningful going on the right side of the axis things that are coming in 3 to 5 years even 1 to 2 years like [NT50 01:02:54] where is it when ... and that's like right here but further out its very, very difficult.

	I don't know whether it's because they don't know or they're afraid to talk about it but it make its very hard for companies. We as industry have invested a trillion dollars in information technology most of which will be obsolete very shortly. That's not a good deal. We have to have it. we have to use it but I'd be interested in taking this subject area and coming back to IT organizations for a minute given the reality of the way the world is working today what we really swept along by the tide of technology and technology companies what would an intelligent IT organization look like to you for a company like Procter & Gamble. How should we be organized? What should we be thinking about in this whole area? If you were CIO what would you do?

Doug:	First I'd have to go to school and learn how to be a CIO.

Speaker 1:	There isn't one.

Doug:	No. One of the real problems for me is if you're an outsider because you're not saying things that people can hear and gawk into their world, if you persist in staying there because you think it's important, you're not getting experience that would it take to know how inside an organization what you have to do. In that concepts and the needs I feel very confident about the general structure of all of this but coming and saying, “Hey I think the CIOs you got to get into a community of CIOs and start helping yourselves work out a lot of the pictures.”

	I can give a lot of what ifs and go find other people that can add things to it but I don't think there's anybody right now that ... what's that frontier mean to CIOs, human resources and other hugely ... they just have to cooperate. Human resource I guess whoever is responsible for how to help map the new roles and organizational structure and the new kind of skills that you're going to take for granted that people are going to have to have in order to live in this new way. They're all very important things in that dimension. It's the cooperation.

Speaker 1:	Fair enough. You might be interested to know Doug I don't think we've shared this. We have an active project right now in the company being led by our chairman and by our president [inaudible 01:05:27] John Pepper it's called the Year 2005 Project. It's basically aimed at the very types of things you are talking about. What are the things we're going to need to do in the future to be successful but an important element on the human dimension was well as the empirical dimension not just IT but a lot of other thing are indeed as well.

	We are starting to address this in a much more thoughtful, planful, comprehensive way and hopefully not an insular way. We're bringing another company who's had a lot of experience helping companies go through this process of trying to figure out what's the world going to be like? What are the scenarios out there and then how do you organize against those today? Other questions, comments, issues for Doug? It's hard for me to see who's out there please. Go ahead.

Speaker 5:	Question about what kind of staffing if you had a company of 100,000 people, what would you think would be right in terms of the amount of staffing put against new frontier activities? Can you give us the feel? I'm sure a company like Procter & Gamble have a quarter of its people focused on that kind of thing?

Doug:	I don't know enough about the business operation. It's the kind of thing that I think progressive companies need to get together and try to start working on themselves. That's all the C level stuff in there. I just know that what's there now isn't going to be able handle the rate of change that's coming about. In trying to get this meta next stuff going and the next ... the CIOs just need to combine or human resources or the combined and collectively start doing that.

	Scenario development you just got to have a lot of that going on. One of the real questions, is this an infrastructure? Can the current kind of infrastructure a lot of times you outsource to consultants something like that to do you're B and maybe C. Where did they get it this advance C? Then they get proprietary about the approach that they start selling instead of sharing out there like that. It just seemed to me that the kind of end user organizations involved in these cooperative stuff and they could collectively fund somebody to do studies and scenarios but they're plugged into the whole community's knowledge base and stuff like that.

Speaker 1:	Other questions in the back. I really can't see that far. Please.

Speaker 6:	In your graph on the screen here I think reflects the challenge that P&G is facing today which is [inaudible 01:08:11] bottom will continue to take advantage of standardization tools and gain greater benefits by doing that. Generically the people are [inaudible 01:08:19] apply those tools and so the human aspect in order to be objective in these global applications that we try to create. I'd be curious to hear your thoughts on how we take advantage of global opportunities and simplification without losing the inherent creativity and innovation that comes from the individual humans that we have.

Doug:	That's one of the primary challenges is integrating the individual contributions and so that combined whole is more effective. I just say I don't have any real answers that they need to get an experiment but there's some of these futuristic things that you pretty sure will happen and one of them is because can work from a distance collectively a lot more effectively it's just a premise that's sure to happen. Then you say, “One of the things that will come about that is the kind of special knowledge and capability that individuals develop could be sold.”

	You could be integrated to a wider range of activities so where it used to be you'd have to be collocated in order to be part of a team then you couldn't afford to have a specialist in there who would only be useful for 1 week out of the 3 months period or something. With this new kind of way of collective working you can bring people in for 6 hours or 2 hours or 10 days from any place in the world so that for individuals that they could start becoming much deeper specialized people and still be saleable but then you realize that some way about integrating the body of knowledge that's there you're going to have to have people who specialty goes across here up and down here or this way or like that.

	It's going to be very important in the way to find a way to integrate rapidly what's going on that that implicit experiential knowledge that somebody who is a specialist across tracks does. The ability for then much more we find deep specialties of various kinds, it's going to be a new kind of market place for people and for the way organizations work. Did that come anywhere near meeting your question?

Speaker 6:	[inaudible 01:10:35]

Speaker 1:	Sure.

Speaker 7:	I think the real challenge for P&G specifically is understand as we try and develop technology solutions for a global organization that global organization is made up of many smaller organizations with very different needs. When do we start have diminishing returns on our efforts to be global versus trying to meet those individual needs and more important how do we discover the balance?

Doug:	The engineer would say, “There just have to be a bunch more built and start burning what they were.” The business about how long do you keep trying to be global if it's starting to make the different components get in trouble, that's one of the things about the interoperability and things like that. That's a very basic out there in society problem that in the end they're going to be integrated into a global capability, the whole connection like that. Somehow if there are barriers to that quietly and respectfully for what people need ... as humans need to be done with they're just one of the problems. Knowing how far to go is trying to appreciate that you may get into what looks like bobby traps and that “My god, am I going to have to fire everybody over 50?” Their skills are out of date now.

Speaker 1:	Assume we can't learn new ones Doug. I would just say on the Procter & Gamble specific implications to that question my own view would be that we have so far to go to gain the benefits of globalizing our worldwide operations including our systems and our global internets and all that we're going to press forward very aggressively toward that and look for the offsets and the balances to make sure we don't standardize to a point where we fail to keep the innovative and entrepreneurial capabilities and the variety of things we need as a global company to be successful.

	I would say in our view in the top of the company at least that I would say 80% to 85% of what we're trying to do is take advantage of our scale through getting rid of our default to difference culture to a default to convergence culture and get the benefits out of that which I don't think we're yet 10% of the way toward really, really achieving even though we've done a lot. There's so much more ahead of us. We have about 5 more minutes here. Anybody got questions wave. Robert?

Robert:	I've got a question on information overload. If you think about the amount of information that is available to us, the human mind can only take in so much and then retain so much. We all face the [information overload 01:13:42] as I think about your comment about 30 years from now being able to hold in the palm of your hand the equivalent the computing capability that existed in the world today my question to you is, how do you envision IT information technology helping with the whole dilemma on information [culture 01:14:04]?

Doug:	It provides the facilities by which you can experiment with how humans with whatever you learn about their capabilities and tolerances and capacities, how they can integrate their respective capabilities into a collective group. Obviously it won't be functionally effective if the individuals are subject to just total overload. There's some question about how much more can they manage if they have the right kind of skills and training and tools as well as the conventions by which the organization's knowledge is organized etc.

	You just say, “That becomes the roles.” That people have to have roles in which they're not exposed to over I'd like that and then you say, “How are we going to do that?” That technology guy say we've got things to offer. This emergence now what they call intelligent agents and it's a little different from what the artificial intelligence people in the past used to do but to harness some of their things. Anyway, those can help be support capabilities for people so they could take off some of the kind of shock of what's going on. Anyway, it's just something to learn and work out.

Speaker 1:	In a sense we're in the middle of this now if you think about it. 25 year ago all the computing people in the world you could probably put on your PC today. The next 25 years is really just an extension of that. I guess Ted you might give the last one.

Ted:	It seems like you spent most of your life pretty far upfront of the world as an innovator and that you were with us very often by the establishment, by the people who working with today's problems. Assuming that's reasonably true, what would say you a bunch of the establishment [inaudible 01:16:20] about ... what advice would you give them about how to treat their innovators to treat people like you were?

Speaker 1:	Great question. Doug we only have 3 minutes for this answer. You get this down to a 60 second commercial. You can think like a Procter & Gamble person here.

Doug:	That comes back to the what's the prevailing paradigms out there so that society is going to be beset by people who are waving their arms and talking about things that other people can't understand. If they'd only turn it into my language, explain it so it's their fault. I recognize that there's that problem and I don't know any answer to it other than that society needs to start adapting its paradigms to fit the times. If the paradigms that are operative aren't up to date, then there'd be people that don't deserve to be pushed under the do something like that.

	Anyway this is one of the things that we talk about infrastructure that can help shape and adapt and try to help move the paradigm evolution fast enough. That's all I can say because I can't blame people for shunting me off in those days. That was the pervading paradigm. There was no way to give them the experiences that would help shape.

Speaker 1:	I would build 2 other points on top of that one would be that management whoever they may be needs to listen better and be willing experiment more and not take anything for granted but go out and try to learn through some empirical experiences about both the most extreme ideas even though they might not seem as though in the world of the possible with today's paradigm.

	I would like to thank Doug and Christina for joining us today. I think it's very, very evident that we have a person here who 30, 40 years ago is thinking as far into the future as to be able to see what we're seeing today and continues to do that as he has demonstrated with his traipsing around the conceptual model of the bootstrap idea into the next 30, 40 years. I think it's truly remarkable. We're truly honored to have you here and thank you very much for coming.

Doug:	Don't go away. Christina said, “Let's give a gift.” I said, “Fine.” We have a gift. She made us late this morning by getting it wrapped.

Speaker 1:	It's a ... go ahead.

Doug:	I'd love to hear what you thought about it.

Speaker 1:	I just realize I was about to put my foot in my mouth so I better shut up.

Doug:	I was given an award for the World Wide Web conference a couple of years ago. The guy who put this up to generate that he got in touch secretly with Christina and so they got together some of the things we published in the past and condensed it into a neat old booklet. They produced a limited published bound thing. They're signed by both me and Tim Berners-Lee and like that. Here's one just for you.

Speaker 1:	Thank you.

Doug:	Meeting him was great and the things I've learned today about your organization, you really are doing better than anybody we've met. Don't let it go to your head. Anyway, we appreciate very much the exposure here.

Speaker 1:	Thank you for coming.