Douglas:	It's a privilege to be here. The combination of terms in the titling of your conference are just very stimulating. I'm going to unload on you a lot about what I've been committed to about the future. It may seem like it's not terribly compatible with what you're doing now but I believe so strongly about what is going to come about and what we need to start thinking about, that I just have to take the opportunity.

	It begins with what my goal has been. This is the wording here that's very appropriate. It says, "As much as possible, my lifetime goal has been to boost mankind's collective capability for coping with complex, urgent problems." This literally is what started me off in 1951. Before there were computers anywhere this side of Boston I guess, or something like that.

	I went to Berkeley, to graduate school. They were building a computer then. By the time I got my PhD and left it still wasn't working. The reason I left Berkeley, I had assumed I would settle down and become a professor and do research because how you could use computers interactively, etc. was the big picture I had.

	I'd been a radar technician in World War II for the Navy. I'd seen what electronics could do to paint pictures on a radar screen and how the electronics could watch an operator turn cranks and push buttons. Hearing that computers could print punch cards and print, I just knew that there'd be no technical problem at all for them to draw anything you want at all on a telescope.

	Also, to watch a human operator so that interact [inaudible 00:02:15] suddenly got the image that people could start learning brand new ways in which hey could externalize the symbols and use symbology in order to represent the concepts that they were dealing with in their head, and that the options for just totally different ways of actually harnessing your cognitive capabilities or sensory capabilities, were just there. Wow. It's something to go after.

	I had this interesting first experience that was to enlighten my life, I guess you could say, for some time after that. I got my PhD and I was an Acting Assistant Professor in EE and I was teaching courses and early courses in computers, etc., before there were any to work with.

	One Saturday at a barbecue, one of the older faculty from a different department was hearing what I was talking about and he says, "Well, Doug, do you understand how a promotion is made in universities?"

	A big part of the story is what a green country kid I've been all these years. Naïve about things. "Well gee, no." He says, "There's something called, 'peer review.'" He says, "If you don't have positive peer review, your papers aren't going to get published in journals that make a difference, and your ratings aren't going to be good. I can tell you if you keep pointing at something like this, you'll be an Acting Assistant Professor forever." I believed him. That was the first of a whole set of experiences that have been going on through the years that were about paradigms.

	If what you're trying to tell the world doesn't fit into the prevailing paradigms, it's just a really, really tough problem in trying to get people to listen. I know I've been on the other side of that enough to know that you could say, "Why doesn't this guy explain it to me in terms of my world, he's trying to get me to understand it. He should explain it to me so I get it, not in his own terms of that sort. THere's just a very basic sort of a situation.

	This goal has been fixed in my mind and pursued year after year and there are some very spectacular periods in which we made a lot of headway. Then we ran into peer reviews. For instance the mid '70s where we had systems we were hypermedia group ware, outline processing, working in a different distance. You could do shared screen anyplace in the [opernet 00:04:44], etc. The rest of the world was talking about office automation. That there really is a secretary. What you see is what you get, was a big deal, etc. You've got to have it easy to learn and natural to use, not like in the [bart 00:05:00] system over there.

	Our research funding just disappeared. We had this marvelous system we had to take out the rest of the world to start using it, etc. like that. Just year after year there was very strong lessons about that the prevailing paradigm is just extremely critical about how the world selects what it's going to see about the future and what it's going to do about the future.

	We could've had hypermedia worlds much sooner. You couldn't tell the personal computer people about this. It wasn't until this marvelous thing happened, the Worldwide Web started expanding. Suddenly there was ways for people to get experience. The experience shifted the paradigms. Now people are beginning to talk a lot more about it.

	Yet what I want to tell you about is it still isn't happening about what the paradigms are about what's happening and what's going top happen, what's possible, and how you can make it happen. I'm still pointing like this. Yes, I think I'll still be an Acting Assistant Professor. I've never made it beyond.

	Anyway, this is a big goal. Much as possible to boost mankind's collective capability for coping with complex, urgent problems. All right. An interesting observation that purposeful pursuit of that goal is itself a complex urgent problem. Instead of letting that defeat you, you can say, "Ah, so there was 1961. Ah." I said if we start making headway and learning how to deal better with complex, urgent problems, let's turn and apply as much of that as we can to the task of improving our capability to deal with complex, urgent problems.

	The better you get at getting better, the better you're going to get at getting better. How do you like that?

	There was an electronic circuit I had learned about int he Navy called the Bootstrapping Circuit. Feed back into back like that. I started calling that the Bootstrapping System. It's there to go after in the future. It's still there. We haven't harnessed it. This is what I'd like to talk more about. What it is that is there to go after.

	That strategy, okay. Let's just do this Bootstrapping Strategy. That's been problem. I set up something 10 years ago with one of my daughters called the Bootstrap Institute to say let's raise a flag and see if we can get this going. Just as long as you keep peer review away from me, I'll be okay.

	Really, the proposals have gone out, then we get it back and it says, "Other people are already doing this and they're farther ahead," which they haven't shown the light of day about what that is yet. Every one of you is subjected to this same sort of thing so that at yet you're part of what establishes the prevailing paradigm. It's just like you've got this double responsibility of how do you help shift the paradigm so that it's more realistically attuned to what's happening and what's going to happen in the future. Let's deal with that a little bit more.

	I'm getting a chance. We've got some funding to run a 10-week, 3-hour week colloquium that's going to be webcast starting in January. It's something I invite people to do. It's a chance to start trying to bore in in-depth along these aspects to establish on the one hand the sort of prevailing opportunities and the paradigms that are there, and yet because of the scale of what is happening, and is still ahead of us, the scale of it requires new ways to thinking and working.

	I said okay, and also you could set up a sort of a strategy to see if that's ... Anyway, I'll get to this. Let's go.

	This is a little just announcing what we're going to be doing there. We just walk with people getting on. We're hoping we could harness some of the response of people.

	This paradigm issue is just very, very, very significant. It's just true. The face of the greatest avalanche of pervasive global changes ever faced by human society. This technology that is emergent, it's making a lot of change. What we don't generally realize in our world is that this is the biggest traumatic sort of [inaudible 00:09:57] in society is happening faster and it's just beginning to happen really fast on such a global pervasive nature that it's bigger in a qualitative and quantitative sense than any society ever had to accommodate to.

	The only way that I can make something that is in some way parallel-

Speaker 2:	We want to hear you better, Doc.

Douglas:	Oh, that's the way to get better peer review. Thank you, Larry.

	The scale of change, it's just ... I did a study about scaling electronic components in the '50s. I was so committed to the computer, interactive use was going to be extremely potent for us, intellectually. Yet it was depending on computers getting cheaper and faster, etc. I did this study about dimensional scaling. There are a lot of already lower in the physical world about how to do dimensional scaling of things. The aircraft people already had it down so that they knew how many other things they had to change in the test scale of a wind tunnel in order to put a model in there and learn useful things about the model.

	Many things happen. As devices and animals get smaller, gravity makes much less difference to them. All the reflexes are much quicker. As some kind of devices get even smaller and smaller you find that the relationship between different phenomena stop working so well. The things that time constants really get much smaller. Things can heat up and cool down in very, very short order. Some of the phenomena used to work together stop working together.

	The one big thing that came out of this was the surprises that are waiting there for people who have been attuned in their unthinking acceptance of the way the world they're in, their attuned to that and they're not oriented about what would happen if changes happen of a scale past a certain point. It just was very clear that a lot of surprises in the scaling world I was looking at and a few years later that just hit me tremendously. To realize that all throughout our society, we've not been oriented about the scale of change. When it's going to happen there are going to be surprises all lover. If we don't get oriented about that scale and the surprises that are going to be there, we're going to have paradigms way out of tune with what's going to happen.

	This is a very important thing so the sense that it's a very dangerous situation for a society as complex as ours not to be aware of that and be oriented appropriately for the kind of things that you've got to look for what's going to be surprising and think through it. That isn't happening. Peer review doesn't let it happen. I'm not trying to be snotty about peer review. It's been a very effective sort of way. We just have to realize that in a paradigm shift, we've got to get real shifts gong in there.

	Here's one of the kind of issues that external environment is just shifting and changing very rapidly. The kind of thing where we're talking about collective capability, it lies within our organizations and our teams and our institutions, etc. They change by funny little step-wise motion. THey're not at all oriented for change at the rate we're talking about here. That's a very dangerous situation.

	Now that I've explained it, I'll leave it for you guys to solve it, I guess, right?

	This exploding rate of change. One of the things is that there're really going to be tough problems. I don't think I can convey to you the whole thing. I could just tell you about it and you can take the words and go with them. You can think about it. Some of these problems are going to be hugely tough to battle, it's going to be happening so fast. Big global changes tomorrow. Real, real problems.

	Ont eh other hand, look, opportunities. What are you going to do about that? One of them is boosting our capacity for effective, collective action. That's one of the opportunities this technology offers us and we're going to go after it. Boosting our capacity to keep improving. That's the sort of trad-off or balance that's been driving me for a long time. It leads to thinking about things on scales and the nature that don't fit today's paradigm. LEt's go taking a look.

	One of the opportunities is that of what I call boosting the collective IQ for organizations. In that respect, the info technology world is dumping stuff out and in the last year or something just really taken off on electrical business, e-business. Big changes.

	This thing about human organizations and they're becoming more effective as collective organization, and the sense that it really works to ... It seems very appropriate to call them social organisms. To say look, that they do ... The action collectively sort of bespeaks of awareness, perception, understanding, purpose, etc. You say all right, I could deal with it like that. So what? Then collective IQ, also.

	How smart is a given body of people getting together? There are many, many issues we already accept that are going to need to be dealt with collectively. It's going to be more and more and more. They're going to be happening faster and more complex. As our ability collectively to deal with things going to be adaptable so that more quickly we can do that. This is a big problem. Evolution happens, right?

	Spurred on the one hand by radically improved nervous systems. This occurred to me in the early '60s as hey, this organism picture really is that [inaudible 00:16:20] and the technology is like a really mutation suddenly for social organisms of a radically new nervous system. You say I can make a model of an organism out there and say, "Hey, if I picture for any biological organism that suddenly they're mutated really extraordinarily advanced nervous stem." What's going to happen? If it happens to a worm or a mole or something like that, do I get something that's all title smarter and a little faster? You begin to realize, no. All the organs and their inter-working are going to be different. The musculature and everything else is going to evolve to take advantage of the speed and flexes and all that. It's going to evolve to be extremely different organism. That's what we've got here.

	The social organisms called organizations and institutions will have just a real spurt of evolution. How do we foster the kind of evolution we'd like to see? That's a real challenge. Part of it is what you guys are doing. Are you doing it fast enough with a picture about how much change is going to happen? Let's go on and talk about a few more of these.

	Anyway, the sense then of a large scale way of thinking about how to get the evolutionary environment for organizations appropriately freed up so that they can evolve more quickly and rapidly and smart. Without somebody steering them so there are a lot of interesting things about that that come about.

	The thing about every given organization is that it's going about its evolution, then you realize that it's ecological niche is just totally unstationary. It's the things are just changing. All the other organizations are changing. The marketplace is changing. The social structures are changing. Governments have to change. Industry, education, education's going to be under marvelous pressure. You survive if we can get there to thinking about how you use the technology now to do our education. If we get trapped into thinking how we do today's kind of education, we'll miss a big important thing.

	Along with the shift in that technology comes things about the for instance the rate at which the world's knowledge is increasing. Somebody made an estimate that in 20 some years, the world knowledge will double about every 3 months. Yo look at that and says oh, that's a scale of change, right? If that's the case, how long is a university's education going to last somebody? Oh. Not very long. That means that most of the significant professional and working roles in society will have to be continuously moving in understanding and knowledge base.

	That means that education no longer can just be handled for K-14 and then college and then you're on your own or maybe do some graduate work. It's got to be there continuously. In that continuous thing is going to be who's going to fill that continuous education role? If universities don't get oriented so that they do it then they're going to be out of a job pretty soon.

	Another sort of thing happens is that the education is going to be integrated right into the rest of the knowledge work that people do. You can't do it so that the computer supportive co-optive learning and all that has to fit right in with all the rest of the computers [inaudible 00:20:06] operations that they're doing. The whole shift about the way people view things and study things and move around in knowledge space is going to evolve very rapidly. You just look at it and says you have to start right from the first to start getting kids oriented to that. They're not going to be able to through just chunk, chunk, chunk, and now I'm ready. THey'll probably go out and be served in some years as an apprentice. Like that. Over the years you'll evolve with more and more seniority and understanding about complex things like that and the roles will shift and change.

	It's going to be an exciting world and where are you guys going to be during that time? After I get through telling you what the problem is and you start solving it then I'll applaud about peer review.

	This multiple pressure that for instance any universities and educational system, they've got to change, bu the world around them's going to be changing. It isn't enough just for them to change in order to be able to harness the technology. They've got to change in order for the role of evolution that has to be a lot more dynamic and continuing all through the years. Who's going to do it?

	This whole picture about people working together, then, starts to be a core sort of thing. We adopted this sort of a circular thing with the criss crosses to say look, there are going to be people working at different roles and they all have to be able to inter-operate across so these lines that go back and forth say that no set of people in this collective operation can sit there isolated. They all have to be, and we used to just say look, we've got a link from here, we'll pop you over into this world and you have to be able to understand and read it. We can't get isolated kinds of conventions for the way our knowledge packages are created. This leads to a whole bunch of ideas ab out it's got to be more general and things got to move faster and it's going to e changed.

	He says okay, and it's going to be dependent upon recorded knowledge for just totally sure. It's going to be in hypermedia form. Beyond. You get along this sort of a thing of okay, here's my social organism. It's interacting with the outside world and concurrently it's integrating, collaborating, developing, learning, reusing, and about 20 years ago we isolated the sort of picture about these 3 kinds of knowledge bases that would be inside that the intelligence collection is okay, what's going on in the outside world we have to keep track of and know about so our organization can take advantage of the opportunities and guard itself against the threats that are out there.

	Intelligence collection is just totally important. Is this thing still working? Yeah? Then the recorded dialogue, it's just very, very basic to the way in which knowledge gets developed about these supportive interaction, about the different parties involved with everything like that. There's just a great deal more to do about the way that recorded dialogue can be interlinked and back linked and back linked management, etc., so that some comments made 2, 3 months ago that could otherwise get buried. It's there that there's processes to trace back to find out okay, we suddenly realize there's a really basic new approach that we're going to go on and it's a real successful idea. Backtracking on that for the attribution of where that came from will just be very, very important so it doesn't get lost.

	The similar kind of thing goes just to look at and says well the conventions about this peer review business and publishing and academic world, it's just simply got to shift. They have to be there provisions so you publish as soon as possible. Maybe only a paragraph or half a page or this or that in a kind of way that dialogue goes along like that, that the essentially the review process is continuous after that to find out how much value that particular observation or fact or something made to there rest of the dynamics.

	It may be 6 months to a year later before the swing really finds out how valuable that was but in the current kind of ways of peer review, that would never have gotten published. I bumped into very, very rigid sort of reactions from academics who would tell me, "You just don't understand. There's no way. THat's the way the whole system works." I try to say, "You don't understand, the world can't move as rapidly as it's going to move and can't take advantage of dynamic knowledge development, etc., that's going to be there if it sticks to sort of old fashioned ways in which knowledge is developed and handled." Anyway, there's just a lot there.

	This whole scene and then at any given time there has to be some kind of integration that's the equivalent of what's the textbook that comes out every so often that integrates the status of a given discipline That's great. That's got to start happening a lot more dynamically and purposefully and not waiting to see which professor somebody is going to come out with it.

	The process of integrating the kind of evolving knowledge state so that everybody doesn't have to go trace through all the dialogue and all of that in order to find out what's the current status. It's like a handbook or an encyclopedia that's dynamically up to date. That is a central challenge in how this collective intelligence is going to be able to develop or work.

	At the same time, everybody involved in this as this dynamic knowledge is shifting and growing is going to have to be learning and staying up to date with the status of this dynamic knowledge repository. That to me is just the central focus for how collectively we are going to get smarter is a really effective dynamic knowledge repository system.

	It isn't going to be that there's just one. Each one of these operating units is going to have its own dynamic knowledge repository about the things it has to know about. At the same time, it's a party of a larger one which also then has to be there. They have to be doing all this concurrently so the world's knowledge is going to be concurrently evolving with lots of pieces of it going like this. The requirements then upon the standards of the knowledge packages, etc. that are going to be dealt with just have to get a lot more open and it has to get broken away from proprietary file structures, etc. All the functionality that's going to be evolving in there just can't also can't be locked in to proprietary software packages.

	The open source process or something like that has got to have ... The scale of change and the requirements about adapting to this and this very, very important to pursue, it's just [inaudible 00:27:38].

	The real user form the sense of what the information technology world is dealing with really has to be shifting to think of it as the organization. That's where the collective understanding and knowledge is the real target so it comes from individuals, etc., but it's no individual is going to be able to cope with the whole big pictures.

	This free market currently for the tools and services won't work without customers that understand what they need. Today's organizations don't. How do you get the organizations and institutions to become really proactively alert about where they're going, what they want to do? Sorry about that.

	Over and over again it's this explosive change. Organizations have to become proactive in exploring the future goals in pursuit of their paths. The school systems as we said before, they need to say how do we change in order to do our teaching and learning better? Also, our role in society is going to be changing and that has to be the secondary thing that's just as actively important as the other one.

	We've devised this term of saying concurrent development integration and application of knowledge to represent the set of capabilities that go along with boosting your collective IQ, if you want to have it like that.

	This open hyper document system we mentioned about that someplace the standards for the knowledge packages have to evolve. They need to go a lot more facilitate all the kind of things you really want to do, capture, integrate manager, merge heterogeneous knowledge, enhance access, maneuverability and the re-utilization, it's got to be scalable and inter-operable across domains, etc. IT's just a really important thing. It has to get broken away from being proprietary stuff.

	It'd be like saying somebody is going to own the vocabulary, and oh, it's proprietary, I'm sorry. Hey wait a minute. You've got to really evolve the environment, that vocabulary. What are the nouns you get for the kind of knowledge objects you're going to have in your knowledge repositories? They're going to get much more fluid, the knowledge objects in there. The functions you're going to apply, the verse, etc. are going to get a lot more fluid. They have to evolve in an open way. There's just now say that they can be anchored to some proprietary sort of system. Until that starts to happen, we're locked away form being really, really effective.

	Another thing comes about is okay, let's sort of ... Trying to back away from the automation idea that just killed me back in those days like that. There's a list I started making. I said look, the basic genetic human capabilities is what we start with. Oh boy, I could think of all these neat technical things like that. See, the facilities we get and the different media we're having and what tools and such. Oh boy and all these things the engineers can do. Oh boy, oh boy, you know?

	I said yeah, but how do they get employed? Oh, we've got a few things on another side of another list. Oh. Oh. This was 1961 that this unfolded for me and I said oh, I'm looking all over for what? What's the name of this other system? I assumed I would be able to knock on a door of a university and find out that there was already a name for all of that and it's not culture and it's not society. It's got a much richer sort of thing so I just called it the human system.

	To realize that any new thing that's appeared in the right-hand column would cause changes in the left-hand column as it learns to harness the tools. You just say boy, one of the biggest things that I can try to think of a scale to change was the invention of agriculture. That the huge change that made in the whole social operational family, etc. structure on the human system was just huge.

	I've tried to think of other changes that I know about in human existence that sort of also were very large changes to just get something about saying look, when we're getting technology over here that's going to get so much faster and cheaper and wide-band, etc. than we're even looking at today, within a decade or so that the now technology is just going to erupt on this right-hand side, that means it's pervasive applicability all throughout the world in this is going to change.

	That means we're just in for surprises, surprises, surprises on the human system side as we learn to accommodate and take advantage of it and safeguard things and adjust, etc. like that. To me, that was just hey world, this augmentation thing is real. There's no capability that you or your organization has that doesn't bear upon this kind of augmentation system. You just take an untutored, raw human of any age that has never had any conditioning inside a society with different kind of facilities and human system and they'd be totally helpless.

	It's learning how to operate inside of this augmentation system that gives you capability. How effective you are etc. in that is still about a lot of motivation and skill and your own basic IQ and stuff. Anyway, that's the thing. He says okay, how much opportunity is there if we start thinking about it, to really boost our collective IQ? I tell you, you start looking in areas, says oh, one of the things about a paradigm that just drove me up a wall is the wizzy wig. What you see is what you're going to get and what they meant in the '70s of what you're going to get when you print it out and making it look exactly like a page of a book was the highest thing. You do your editing on that and then you print it out.

	Starting in the '60s we were saying, "Oh look, you have options. You can show all sorts of views." One of the views, just show me the first line of every paragraph so I much quicker get an orientation. Oh, well let's organize them hierarchically so just show me the first 2 levels of the document, one line each. Oh. Let me see only a certain content. You started opening up the opportunity for people to experiment with different views. Then you found you could sort things. Then you found you could ask for all sorts of [inaudible 00:35:08].

	The wizzy wig just clamped down and it's still a thing that dominates out there. God Almighty, that's like your automobiles had to operate with reigns because that's the natural way to steer vehicles. Really it's that ludicrous of that's the view we have in scrolling instead of other kinds of jumbling around. That kinds of vocabulary you can get for the functionality of how you want to move around and operate.

	I get big lessons by watching kids on skateboards and says boy, easy to learn and natural to use, huh? Do you even know how guys on skateboards operate unless you're young enough to have learned? Then I watched them one day come zooming along, and they and the skateboard jump over a foot high curb. Go up over it and the skateboard's not tied to their feet, how do they do it? It's a very interesting thing. They had to show me about 4 times with great shows of disgust for this old fart that was ...

	The skateboards have this lip that go back and forth in front of the wheels. They come along like that and they jump off there and their back foot stomps on that lip. The whole thing gets anchored up like that. The front foot stops it there and the other foot goes like that and they've got both feet planted lightly on there and sail right on to new height.

	You tell me about the ergonomics guy that would figure that out and tell people that that's what you could do. Then you watch the way you drive around in traffic, too. You realize the amount of skill you have and the way you interpret the guy's actions just by a quick glimpse. Is he tracking what he should be doing or is it a little off? Does he see you? This and that?

	Much more, looking in the rear view mirror and judging okay, 65 miles and hour, 3,000 pounds of stuff coming right in your trial. I often think about the 1905 people that if you told them that sure, everybody's going to be driving like that, they absolutely wouldn't have believed you. In the first place, mirrors this size were for shaving, not for looking at something like that. Just the skill of doing that.

	You realize that the way that technologies offer me the chance to harness our basic sensory perceptual machinery and our cognitive processes and our motor actions like that just asking for a whole shift in that. I'd be willing to bet you that in 10 or 15 years that what you look at now is the way you study something because likely it'll just change drastically.

	For one thing, look. Suppose somebody found out and did some experimenting that they have something automatically parsing as it went ahead like that. It showed it to you in color differentiation about the parts of speech that were there. How much quicker could you go scanning for what you want to get out of there and learn about it? I'd be willing to bet it'd make a big difference and yet that would seem totally unacceptable today. It's not easy to learn or natural to use, like rear view mirrors, things of that sort. If there's, there's just different ways of thinking about what the future can have. That means different ways of how we go explore them.

	Another very, very important aspect here, this augmentation system was a huge one. Then capability infrastructure is another thing in society so that the technology revolution offers singular improvements throughout many levels and places within the tool human augmentation system. There's a whole infrastructure of capabilities that feed on other capabilities, etc. to give you your net capability.

	An individual operates with an infrastructure and there are going to be many changes throughout that that the technology can offer. Even more within an organization. That whole infrastructure is there so the capability infrastructure is an extremely important concept of that. That's something I keep waiting to have the world talk about. Peer review, I guess.

	Then what's the interface we're talking about? A really, really key one is the human with your augmentation system and the interface between the tool and the human and the total importance of the co-evolution of those things. That's what we have to work on. The automation idea is just sort of doesn't look for that. It's opportunity for you guys when you're talking about changing education and the process of teaching and learning as hey, let's look throughout that whole kind of augmentation system and see about changes.

	Here is another very interesting thing to me about thinking about the future as saying well, if I simplify to about a tool system and a human system and if I had some way of going through the world societies and characterizing where they fit on this chart. This chart says I can anticipate a human system maybe up to here and a tool system coming up to here. In 20 years it'll be even further out there. Just within that framework, how do I rate different societies?

	There's a fairly primitive one, but as primitive as you find them they still have sophisticated language. I start plotting them around the world and it's a pretty magical process. I do it by peer review. You look around and they say there's quite a distribution. How about your organization? We need to be polite to you and let you feel like your organization is up front. We look at them always. There's a distribution like that in the world's organizations.

	How are they moving in the space? You sort of feel like they move up to the right and getting more sophisticated harnessing a technology and utilizing of upgraded human systems. Somebody says okay, now how well does this particular one show the future? How about these boundaries out here like that? Let's just say it's probably more like this. That our distribution's like this but the technologies that we can anticipate are out here and an associate changes of a human systems are up here. Oh, great. We have sort of a challenge.

	Our organizations have been looking with boundaries not very far out and it's slow to move an organization, anyway. Let's just say how about the institutions of education here? Did I go dead? [inaudible 00:42:37] Technology. Physician to the service. Oh that's it. Let's give him a good peer review.

	You're faced with educational institutions now that suddenly the world is changing a lot. The devil's thing is they could change very much the way they operate with a new kind of tool and human system combinations. Oh, and at the same time have to realize that the rest of the world's going to be shifting so the education's role in society is going to be shifting, also. You have to be aware of both those simultaneous transitions going through, which is something like saying okay, what's the marketplace going to be for education in the future? It's going to be just very continuous out there and rapid and that starting from very, very early in life, people will start learning how to work with their symbol structures interactively online, etc. in very different ways. The ways they'll start collaborating and learning and teaching, etc. They have to just shift right into the ways that the rest of the world does it on a real professional basis.

	You have to watch the kind of things you do in the educational world to see that they merge with what the rest of the world is doing all at the same time as well as give it the continuous thing. Then there's something else that challenges scale in this thing. The rate and scale of change. I don't know how many of you read anything about the term, "Nanotechnology," but it's where it's the explicit pursuit of how you manufacture things with very, very much reduced scale down until you just actually talk about moving molecules into explicit positions. Then learning to make devices and things, including making little factories that assemble, they call them, "Assemblers," that they can assemble molecules in a certain way.

	Oh, one interesting thing is they can go into the garbage and start extracting carbon molecules there and put them in the right kind of form. You end up with diamond. Oh. You're going to use diamond for a structural material. Oh, that's interesting. There are many, many surprises in there. In cases where it really is inevitable now that you're going to be able to have so much computing power. This one guy explained it to me, one way of doing it is yes, you can hold in your hand something that has processing and memory that's equivalent to all of the computing processing and memory in the world today. Is that going to be 15 years, 20 years, or whatever? At the rate it takes the world to get used to that, in 20 years is going to seem like God, suddenly tomorrow you've got to be ready for something very different.

	The scale of change has got to be factored into our world. Nanotechnology is for real. They talk about health, they talk about little creatures that you can inhale that will be smart enough to crawl all through your body and find cells that need fixing. They says oh, we'll live longer. Oh. Pretty soon they're saying, why would you even die? Keep your body young forever. Oh. Is that exciting? Who knows what the psychological problems would be if you just keep growing older or something. Who knows what the world's population problems are going to be. Those are just examples of the kind of things that are going to come about. That are going to be big, big, big shifts in changes that the complex world, we need to get smarter about coping with. More of this stuff.

	Maybe I'll stop here. I don't want to discourage you totally but this is more like what you have to start thinking about is hey, we've gotten used to the world down here and all of a sudden, these frontiers are way out there. The issue is our organizations have to start moving through here. They don't have to, we could all stay like we are now but things are going to start changing and you've got to change to accommodate the change.

	Who's going to be steering these organizations? Our world is not oriented about evolution on this scale. Organizations and institutions change. Even universities. What's the process by which universities change? Is the process enough that it's alert about all of this to say hey, the very way we teach and work can change. Yes. The very way knowledge is being developed and handled throughout the world is going to be explosively changing. We should be at the forefront of that. At the same time, oh my God, how are we going to keep up? Where are the resources going to come from to let universities start looking for the role that they need to play next. Are they going to get ousted by competitor, commercial educational outfits that'll teach for money? How's the research thing going to happen?

	Every research group in the world is going to be part of a knowledge conduit that goes right smooth out into all the rest of the world, back and forth along that conduit. It'll be a very much more dynamic sort of thing from what it is today. It's going to be very much needing academic-like research but academic-like research is going to need to change to fit into that world.

	One thing about it is organizations, you can't just go plunk a General Motors out there or even a Stanford University, so what the look is somehow we have to get the best thing in America, the western world we talked about a frontier and had outposts out in there. Some place we need to get special purpose teams of people that are really working in brand new ways that really are representative of how a whole big organization is going to be able to work out there. There are a lot of thinking about that. Without that kind of action in there, how are bigger organizations going to have an idea about where to move in that world?

	This comes about the whole idea of an improvement infrastructure. I'll keep laying on all these kind of abstractions. Any kind of organization that became quite clear about 12 years ago saying oh, it would be very useful to characterize the different kinds of activity relative to improvement in an organization. We said let's get these 3 categories, A, B, and C, and the A activity was the way it operates today. All the capabilities you need to do today and operate.

	If you're going to improve your capability, then people have to put on a bee hat. The effort of improving augmentation system methods, tools, process, etc., the change and improve the capability to do your A work.

	B becomes important. Then if things are changing more and more rapidly, you realize you have to start improving the ability of B. It's outlook, etc. And what's going on there so that this A, B, and C became important so it just says okay. If we've got to get our organizations moving more rapidly, we have to start getting them more clear about their A, B, and C. What are the budgets involved in those things? Who's doing it and why don't they go?

	One way of characterizing. Here you've got your frontier and you says oh, the C activity is the scout for trying to find out what's going on out there and what would be a good path to do. The B is like the wagon train or something says I'm going to move our organization out. Those two have become much more important than they ever were today, before. You've got an idea about how the infrastructure ideas inside of society and organizations need to sort of operate.

	This evolved for us that we get the idea saying oh, here are these different organizations. Universities, what have you? Each of them have customers. They have A, B, and C. Let's assume that there are group universities that they have similar capability improvement targets. Oh. Let's just say one of the things we can do is do a lot of common work at the C level. That's idea of a lot of consortiates that are like that. He says let's characterize that even further. Let's just get it in there so that we say oh, let's just do this and the best way we can about collective work and put the most advanced As we can in the basket of the C people, which is how to help explore out the group.

	There are a lot of things that this reflects on that are pretty good. We started saying oh, then you can get even beyond that. This thing we call a networked improvement community, or NIC. Let's say okay, let's say that would be a very important idea. Then let's move up a level and let's make a NIC whose members are NICs. All these different groups and collections that are trying to learn how to better improve themselves and do it with NICs. This is the idea, here.

	This is an improvement infrastructure idea that we've been promoting and the possibilities of it becoming actually at national scales. It turned out that Japan got interested enough in this so they formed a Japanese chapter of this Bootstrap Alliance and were trying to point around the world to say hey, national improvement infrastructures would be a great idea. A lot to learn about each other. There are a whole bunch of strategic thinking about the way all this could happen and that this colloquium we're going to be running is going to be trying to tell a story in ways that can get into detail enough and involve people around the world.

	You guys are represent an improvement community. The potential for you to start using more and more of the improvement ... You guys could have your own knowledge repositories, more dynamics, you could represent one. At the same time, the things you would generate would be very useful to other ... NICs. He says great. You've got your kind of things would be producing stuff that other NICs would like. They on the other hand, would be doing a lot of very basic collaborative techniques about working on scenarios of the future, about how you do intelligence gathering and collection, etc. and so on that would benefit yours. You says oh, there becomes a bootstrapping idea about what you would cultivate for NICs and how they would work together to support the evolution.

	I've gone a little too slowly and my time is just about up so I'll just sort of say that all this may seem fanciful, but to me it's just been very, very real through the years. One of the real, real things is how much potential there is for we humans to be able to harness our machinery more effectively so that we can keep up with the understanding of an ever more dynamic and critical world and society to create something that's better.

	I've just been forced year after year to just say every year sooner that the world gets the idea that we can really go after the collective smarts better, gives us a better chance for survival. That's what keeps me staggering forth in spite of peer review. Anyway. I'd invite you to tune in to this colloquium web casting that we're going to do. I would like it if there are groups that could participate in starting to do some of this collective infrastructure improvement.

	Thank you very, very much.

